Prognostic factors in ALS: A critical review Adriano Chio1, Giancarlo Logroscino2, Orla Hardiman3, Robert Swingler4, Douglas Mitchell5, Ettore Beghi6, Bryan G. Traynor7, and Eurals Consortium 1Department of Neuroscience, University of Torino and San Giovanni Battista Hospital, Torino, Italy 2Department of Epidemiology HSPH, Harvard University, Boston, USA 3Department of Neurology, Beaumont Hospital and Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Dublin, Ireland 4Department of Neurology, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, Scotland 5Preston MND Care and Research Centre, Royal Preston Hospital, Preston, UK 6Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche ‘Mario Negri’, Milano, Italy 7Section on Developmental Genetic Epidemiology, NIMH, NIH, Bethesda, USA Abstract We have performed a systematic review to summarize current knowledge concerning factors related to survival in ALS and to evaluate the implications of these data for clinical trials design. The median survival time from onset to death ranges from 20 to 48 months, but 10–20% of ALS patients have a survival longer than 10 years. Older age and bulbar onset are consistently reported to have a worse outcome. There are conflicting data on gender, diagnostic delay and El Escorial criteria. The rate of symptom progression was revealed to be an independent prognostic factor. Psychosocial factors, FTD, nutritional status, and respiratory function are also related to ALS outcome. The effect of enteral nutrition on survival is still unclear, while NIPPV has been found to improve survival. There are no well established biological markers of progression, although some are likely to emerge in the near future. These findings have relevant implications for the design of future trials. Randomization, besides the type of onset, should take into account age, respiratory status at entry, and a measure of disease progression pre-entry. Alternative trial designs can include the use of natural history controls, the so-called minimization method for treatment allocation, and the futility approach. Introduction Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a progressive degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons leading to limb paralysis, dysphagia, dysarthria, and respiratory failure. The cause of the disease is unknown and there is no effective cure. Although it is generally reported that the mean survival of patients from symptom onset is 3–5 years (1), ALS has a considerable variability in outcome and its prognostic factors are not satisfactorily defined. A better understanding of factors influencing ALS outcome would guide physicians and patients in scheduling therapeutic interventions (2) and is particularly relevant to clinical trials design (3). The design of clinical trials to test compounds for therapeutic benefit in ALS relies on accurate information on disease outcome and prognostic factors (4). A priori knowledge of pattern of survival would allow effective stratification, decrease the number of patients that Correspondence: A. Chio, Department of Neuroscience, Via Cherasco 15, 10126 Torino, Italy. Fax: 39 0116963487. achio@usa.net. Declaration of interest: The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper. NIH Public Access Author Manuscript Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. Published in final edited form as: Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2009 ; 10(5-6): 310–323. doi:10.3109/17482960802566824. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text need to be enrolled to achieve adequate study power, and, consequently, decrease the cost of ALS trials. Unequal distribution of patients with different outcomes between the treatment groups has complicated the interpretation of the results of at least three trials (branch chain amino acids, IGF-1) (5-7). These failures indicate that the current method of case stratification (i.e. bulbar onset versus spinal onset) may be inadequate. Another more subtle bias in clinical trials is the inclusion of long-surviving (i.e. prevalent) patients. The purpose of this review is to summarize current knowledge concerning factors related to survival in ALS, to evaluate the strength of evidence supporting each factor, and to assess the implications of these data for clinical trial design. Methodological considerations Search strategy and selection criteria Papers published between 1960 and August 2008 were identified by PubMed literature searches using the terms “amyotrophic lateral sclerosis”, “motor neuron disease”, “progressive muscular atrophy”, “progressive bulbar palsy”, “survival”, “outcome”, “prognosis”, and “prognostic factor”, Additional publications were identified using the world wide web, from the references of these papers and from the authors’ own files. Only articles in English were considered. Classification of outcome studies Outcome studies can be classified into three broad categories: 1) studies based on series from ALS referral (tertiary) centres; 2) studies based on the placebo arm of pharmacological trials; and 3) studies based on epidemiological series. Moreover, each study can be defined as prospective or retrospective, according to the type of observation over time. (1) Studies based on referral centres series (Table I) are typically based on large cohorts of patients, collect high quality data on clinical factors, and have a high level of diagnostic accuracy. However, referral centre studies are prone to patient selection bias due to the retrospective nature of these studies, referral bias that is inherent to a tertiary referral centre, and a relatively high loss to follow-up (8-15). (2) Studies based on the placebo arm of pharmacological trials (5,16) (Table I) are generally prospective, well conducted, and have a good standardization of examined prognostic factors, a high level of diagnostic accuracy and include a relatively homogeneous population. However, this population is likely to have unique characteristics, representing a highly selected group of ALS patients, generally younger and more motivated than the general ALS population (1,17), fulfilling the criteria for ‘probable’ and ‘definite’ ALS by the El Escorial criteria (18) and with minimal respiratory involvement. Trial protocols typically exclude patients with conditions such as renal or liver failure and a variety of other chronic conditions, as well as fast progressors, thus further limiting the usefulness of these data for prognostic purposes in the clinical setting. (3) Prognostic surveys performed on population-based series rely on unselected populations, and therefore are likely to provide a better assessment of prognostic factors. However, the majority of epidemiologically-based studies are retrospective and small in size (19-22) (Table II). Retrospective design has several pitfalls: 1) it does not allow certain prognostic factors, such as symptoms progression rate to be assessed; 2) it is less accurate with regard to certainty of disease diagnosis, since it is usually based on the retrospective revision of clinical data; and 3) there is a risk of missing specific subsets of patients not captured by the study design. Chio et al. Page 2 Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text Recently, outcome studies based on prospective population-based registers using multiple sources of information to ensure complete case ascertainment within a defined geographical area have been published (23-27) (Table III). These studies represent an advancement of the classical epidemiological studies and are considered the best available methodological design for the study of rare disorders. They have the advantage of allowing the application of uniform and definite diagnostic criteria and permit the assessment of prognostic factors in a standardized manner. Most importantly, the completeness of case ascertainment permits the analysis of the full clinical spectrum of the ALS population, in particular the old or very old cases, as demonstrated by the older mean age of onset observed in the registry cohorts compared to that of both retrospective epidemiological series and referral series. The drawbacks of epidemiological registries are the costs of a prospective follow-up and the complexity in organization and coordination. Overall survival The median survival from onset to death in ALS is reported to vary from 20 to 48 months with ALS referral centres reporting longer survival times (8,9,11,13,28,29). This wide range narrows when considering population-based studies, which are more likely to reflect the experience of the general ALS population (20–36 months) (22-27). All studies report that 5 to 10% of ALS patients survive for more than 10 years. Specific prognostic factors Demographic factors Age: The vast majority of studies has found that age is a strong prognostic factor in ALS, with decreasing survival time correlating with increasing age of symptom onset (9,11,12,14,20,25-27,31,32). Patients with symptom onset before 40 years of age have longer survival, often exceeding 10 years (14,26). It is noteworthy that over 80% of patients less than 40 years of age are men (26). Conversely, median survival among patients presenting after 80 years of age is less than two years (31) and males and females are equally represented in this age group. Gender: Most studies have found that gender has no effect on ALS outcome, despite the higher frequency of bulbar onset disease among older women. Notable exceptions are the two register-based studies from Washington State, U.S.A. and Scotland (23,26) and the two small retrospective studies (33,34) that found a significantly shorter survival among women both in univariate and in multivariate analyses. Clinical factors Site of onset: Bulbar onset disease is associated with a worse prognosis than spinal onset (12,14,26,32,35). This finding is not completely explained by the increased frequency of bulbar disease in old age (17,24,25,31,35). In a registry-based study, the presence of bulbar symptoms at the time of diagnosis was an independent prognostic factor (25) indicating that bulbar function at any stage of the illness plays a major role in determining outcome. Not surprisingly, respiratory onset disease is a strikingly negative prognostic factor (36,37). However, a recent paper indicated that ALS patients with respiratory onset who underwent non-invasive ventilation had a significant improvement of survival compared to those who did not use non-invasive ventilation (38). Data on differences in prognosis between patients with upper and those with lower limb onset are conflicting. Some studies showed a poorer prognosis with lower limb onset (11,25,32), perhaps due to an increased risk of thromboembolic disease and infections Chio et al. Page 3 Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text arising from loss of motility. One study found a poorer outcome in patients with upper limb onset (39). Patients with incomplete forms of motor neuron disease, such as those with pure lower motor neuron disease (sometimes referred as progressive muscular atrophy, PMA), have a better prognosis than those with ‘classic’ ALS (27,32). Diagnostic delay: Several studies, but not all, have found that a longer delay from symptom onset to diagnosis carries a better prognosis (10,12,14,15,26,27,29,35,40-42). Interestingly, in a study comparing a population-based incidence cohort to a referral cohort, the duration of symptoms from onset to diagnosis was significantly related to survival only in the latter cohort (17). In general, the finding of a worse prognosis in patients with a short time delay between onset and diagnosis is likely to indicate a more aggressive disease, which leads the patient to seek medical attention more rapidly and is more readily diagnosed (26). Family history of ALS: Most studies have not found any differences in outcome between patients with sporadic and those with familial ALS (12,25,43). However, it is now generally accepted that different mutations of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) have different effects on the age of onset of symptoms (43,44) and on the rate of progression of the disease. For example, A4V mutation is associated with an extremely rapid decline, with a mean survival of 12 months, whereas E21G, G37R, D90A G93C, and I113T mutations determine a more benign course, with a median survival – 80 months) (43,45). In most instances, clinically mild mutations are characterized by a prevalent lower motor neuron disease, with few or no pyramidal signs. Furthermore, some mutations, such as I113T, are characterized by large intra-familial variations both in age of onset and in clinical phenotype (46), indicating the presence of modifying factors that may either be genetic or environmental in nature. A systematic analysis of the different phenotypes of SOD1 mutations is still lacking. Rate of disease progression: It has long been believed that the loss of motor neurons in ALS is linear, but it is unclear if clinical decline is also linear. The rate of symptom progression has been analysed in relatively few studies. A study analysing a series of 62 patients enrolled in two clinical trials found that linear estimates of rates of disease progression based on isometric myometry and FVC measures were better predictors of patient survival than demographic data (28). These findings were replicated in two additional independent series (47). Similarly, in a prospective study based on a referral centre, ALS outcome was significantly related to the decline of various measures of disease progression (MRC compound score, FVC% and ALSFRS) during the first year of follow-up (39). In a prospective register-based study, the rates of progression of respiratory, lower limb and bulbar impairment during the first six months after diagnosis (measured with FVC, MRC scale and bulbar scale, respectively) were independent prognostic factors in the Cox multivariable model (25). Similar data were found from the analysis of two different series of patients enrolled in the placebo arm of two clinical trials (16,48). In a recent paper on a small series, the progression rate of ALSFRS-R score evaluated at presentation was significantly related to ALS prognosis (49). Lastly, in a paper on a referral ALS series, the rate of progression of ALS-FRS-R, both during the whole disease and the first 100 days after diagnosis, revealed to be strongly related to survival (50). Also, neurophysiological data support this concept: a study on the decline of motor unit number using MUNE indicated that this parameter is related to prognosis (51). More indirect evidence comes from the parallel decline between ALS-FRS and neurophysiological measurements (52). Chio et al. Page 4 Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text These observations, taken together, indicate that each individual ALS patient has an intrinsic ‘disease progression rate’, and that this rate is maintained during the course of the disease, indirectly confirming the hypothesis of a linear decline of clinical status in ALS. More important, these findings suggest that it could be possible to utilize symptom progression rate as a measure of efficacy in clinical trials of new drugs. Psychosocial factors—Although often overlooked by clinicians, psychosocial factors seem to play an important role in ALS outcome. A longitudinal study has found that patients with psychological distress (measured with a battery of psychological assessment scales evaluating perceived stress, depression, hopelessness, anger expression, and purpose in life) had a 2.24-fold (95% CI 1.08–4.64) increased risk of dying than patients with psychological well-being (53). A longitudinal assessment of mood and self-esteem on survival showed that lower mood predicted a faster progression and a shorter survival (54). However, it is also possible that this effect is related to the fact that low mood is the consequence of having a more rapidly progressive disease. In an analysis of the effect of quality of life (QoL) on outcome, the physical health summary measure of the SF-36 was found to be independently related to outcome, whereas only a trend was found for the mental health summary measure (26). In the same paper, marital status was also shown to be relevant in the outcome of ALS; patients who lived alone had a significantly worse prognosis than patients who were married. Despite this, attention must be drawn to one major caveat. There are increasing clinical, pathological and genetic data suggesting that ALS and FTD syndromes form a spectrum of disease (55). It is well recognized that ALS patients with florid FTD have a shortened survival and so it cannot be discounted that the psychological features identified in the above studies are symptomatic of early or mild clinical cognitive impairment (56). It should be noted that none of the studies on QoL and survival rigorously assessed frontal lobe function. Cognitive functions: In recent years, it has become increasingly evident that 5–10% of ALS patients develop an overt frontotemporal lobar dementia (FTLD), and probably up to half of all patients have a subtle impairment of temporal and frontal lobe cognitive function (57). Despite this, there have been no population-based, longitudinal studies of cognition in ALS. A recent clinic-based study found that patients with ALS-FTLD have a shorter survival than those with normal executive and behavioural function (median survival, 28 months vs. 39 months) (51). This difference is likely to be due, at least in part, to poor compliance of ALS- FTLD patients for non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG). Conversely, mild cognitive impairment may have little or no effect on ALS outcome (58). Nutritional status: It is generally recognized that malnourishment is a relevant determinant of outcome in ALS. However, surprisingly few studies, if any, have analysed this factor in ALS series. Body Mass Index (BMI) is a generally accepted marker of nutritional status: in a study on 55 ALS patients prospectively followed up, a BMI value 518.5 has been found to be an independent prognostic factor for death both in univariate and in multivariable analysis (59). Similarly, in a prospective study based on patients allocated to the placebo arm of the CNTF trial, weight loss compared to pre-study weight appeared to be significantly related to a worse prognosis (16). Respiratory status: Respiratory function is generally considered important in ALS. All studies evaluating respiratory status found that a lower predicted forced vital capacity (FVC %) at diagnosis was the single most relevant prognostic factor in ALS (16,25,38,60,61). Per cent predicted vital capacity (VC%) and the slope of decline of VC% have been Chio et al. Page 5 Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text significantly correlated with ALS survival (62). Sniff nasal pressure (SNP) has been found to accurately reflect intra-thoracic pressures and to be more significantly associated with respiratory failure than FVC%, but not in bulbar onset patients (63). Upright and supine forced vital capacity, maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) and maximal expiratory pressure (MEP) were significantly correlated to tracheostomy-free survival in a series of 95 ALS patients (64). Functional/disability scores: Several disability scores have been proposed for ALS. The ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS) is the most widely used functional scale for ALS. A recent single-centre study found that ALSFRS-R, a revised form of the original ALSFRS score, was significantly related to outcome, and that the respiratory sub-score was the single most significant component (41). In a small study, the progression rate of the ALSFRS-R, calculated as differential of score from onset to diagnosis/disease duration (in months), resulted to be significantly related to prognosis (49). Rarely, other disability scores have been used for assessing ALS progression. In one centre study, the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis score was the only significant prognostic factor besides age (65). Similarly, the Appel ALS Score (AALSS) was a significant predictor of ALS prognosis in a Cox multivariable analysis of a series of 831 patients from a tertiary ALS centre (10). This finding was confirmed by a second study performed in the same ALS centre, which found that both a higher baseline AALSS and a higher slope of AALSS from onset to the basal visit were correlated to a shorter survival (29). El Escorial criteria: The El Escorial criteria (EEC) (66) and their more recent revised form (EEC-R) (18) were developed to provide a structured tool to define the level of confidence of a diagnosis of ALS in individual patients in order to facilitate international collaboration in clinical trials and studies of ALS. According to the presence of lower and upper motor neuron signs and their distribution in four regions, i.e. bulbar, upper limb, thoracic, lower limb, the EEC-R classify patients to different degrees of diagnostic certainty (definite, probable, probable with laboratory confirmation, possible). Although mainly intended for use in research settings, the EEC have also been studied as potential prognostic markers. Most studies (13,15,25,27,39,41,67) but not all (24), have found that a diagnosis of definite ALS at the time of presentation carries a poorer prognosis compared to all other diagnostic levels. However, further analysis of the Irish data confirms that definite ALS carries a significantly worse prognosis than suspected and possible ALS (unpublished data, Orla Hardiman). Since a diagnosis of definite ALS implies muscle weakness and wasting in at least three regions, this finding is likely to indicate that patients with more widespread clinical involvement at the time of diagnosis have a more rapid progression of the disorder. However, it must be noted that the EEC were not originally designed as tools to determine burden of disease, but rather to reflect certainty of diagnosis, and in this context it is perhaps not surprising that the specificity of the criteria as a prognostic indicator is poor. Therapeutic factors Therapeutic interventions: After the licensing of riluzole in 1996, several studies, both population-based and from referral centres, have found a positive, independent, effect of this drug on ALS patients outcome (13,25,68,69). Riluzole may improve mortality rate by 23% and 15% at 6 and 12 months, respectively (68,70). While the insertion of PEG is now widely used as a measure for avoiding starvation and dehydration and improving QoL (71,72), it is still debated whether enteral nutrition has a positive effect on survival. A population-based study has found that PEG is an independent prognostic factor (25). Conversely, one study from Scotland found that PEG did not confer Chio et al. Page 6 Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text any survival advantage compared to no gastrostomy (73), but this study reported a 25% one- month mortality after gastrostomy, a figure substantially higher than that found in clinical series (74). Also, different practices in proposing and executing PEG (i.e. early or late after the onset of swallowing difficulties) could play a role. Although two controlled studies have demonstrated that NIPPV confers a significant advantage to ALS patients in terms of median survival (increase of 205 days) and quality of life (35,75), surprisingly NIPPV has not been widely studied as a prognostic factor. In a population-based study NIPPV did not modify overall survival, but this finding was explained by the low number of patients who underwent this intervention (25). There are indications that early NIPPV increases survival compared to late NIPPV (76). Interdisciplinary care: A positive effect of being followed by a neurologist versus a non- neurologist has been reported by two population-based studies (20,31). Recently, two registry studies have shown that patients followed by ALS tertiary centres have a better prognosis than patients seen by traditional neurology clinics (77,78), but this finding has not been confirmed by another registry study (79). The positive effect of ALS centres seems to be independent from all other considered prognostic factors (namely age, site of onset, enteral nutrition and NIPPV), and has been therefore explained as a consequence of comprehensive care of patients. However, these results should be considered cautiously, since they were not controlled and were based on a post hoc analysis. Biological markers Biological markers of progression: One of the most difficult tasks in ALS is to identify biological markers of disease progression. Contrasting results have been reported for APOE genotypes, with most studies indicating no effect on survival (38,80,81), and a single study on 403 ALS patients demonstrating that APOE plasma levels over 6.3 mg/dl were correlated with a shorter survival time (Cox model, relative risk 1.083, 95% CI 1.019–1.151) (81) The presence of a homozygous deletion SMN2 gene has been found to be over-represented in a series of 110 ALS patients compared with controls (16% vs. 4%) and to carry a shorter median survival time (2.3 vs. 4.2 years) (82); however, this finding was not confirmed by a study on 106 patients with sporadic ALS and 18 with familial ALS (83). Recently, the muscle expression of NOGO A, a protein inhibiting axonal regeneration, has been found to significantly correlate with the severity of clinical disability of a series of 15 ALS patients (84). A lower serum chloride level at study entry has been related to a worse prognosis in a study based on 245 patients of the placebo group of the observational study on 2069 patients, plasma creatinine levels below the normal range resulted to be a strong independent prognostic factor (15), although no convincing explanations for this finding have been proposed. A recent study on 369 ALS patients from a single referral centre found a significant increase of survival among patients with an elevated LDL/HDL ratio (85). Although intriguing, this factor needs confirmation in different populations. A study of magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) of brain in a small prospective series of patients with ALS showed that patients with a Nacetylaspartate (NAA)/choline (Cho) ratio in the motor cortex lower than 2.11 had a reduced survival of 19.4 months compared with 31.9 of patients with a ratio over 2.11 (86). According to the authors, this observation is suggestive of cerebral degeneration and could represent a sensitive and specific marker both of ALS diagnosis and ALS survival. Summary of observations: The discrepancies about ALS survival found in the published literature are mostly related to differences in study design. However, when considering only studies based on register methodology (more likely to report the full spectrum of the ALS population), the range of median survival is quite narrow (around 30 months from first Chio et al. Page 7 Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text symptom). Interestingly, these studies are also characterized by an older age of onset (62–67 years) than those based on other designs. However, in 10–20% of cases survival exceeds five years and, in 5–10%, 10 years. Despite the evidence of several publications, it is still impossible to predict with a good approximation the prognosis for an individual patient at the time of his/her diagnosis. However, several prognostic factors are well established. There is a general consensus that older age and bulbar onset are negatively related to ALS outcome, but the complex relationship between age, female gender and bulbar onset remains to be clarified. Also, the time delay from onset to diagnosis and the El Escorial diagnosis of definite ALS at the time of presentation, seem to have prognostic relevance, since they probably reflect a more rapid progression of the disorder. Several measures of disease progression have been found to be related to ALS outcome; all these measures have demonstrated linear progression, confirming the hypothesis that the loss of function in ALS has a linear course, paralleling the rate of loss of motor neurons. It remains to be established which is the best measure for estimating the loss of function in ALS, but some studies reported that ALSFRS (or its more recent revision, ALSFRS-R) could be a reliable, easy-to-use and reproducible measure to be included in trials. Several trials are actually using these measures. Although relatively few studies have been performed on psychosocial factors, these factors seem to have a profound effect on ALS outcome, both influencing the patients’ choices on the use of life-supporting interventions, such as PEG and NIPPV (2), and acting on their health behaviour, on the behaviours of family and professional carers and on psychological mechanisms relevant to disease progression (54). Also, the impairment of cognitive functions could have some impact on ALS outcome, but this issue deserves further study with standardized batteries of tests and a clearer definition of the level of cognitive impairment to be included as a cut-point. Advances in the care of people with ALS, including enteral nutrition and NIPPV, have to some extent modified the course of the disease to the point that it is now no more possible to talk of ‘ALS natural history’. These interventions should be considered when planning future pharmacological trials. Even if only few studies have analysed it, multidisciplinary care seems to have a positive and cost-effective effect on ALS outcome, and, most important, this effect seems to be independent of other known prognostic factors. However, the nature of this additional value of multidisciplinary centres remains unclear, and should be further studied. Today, despite some attractive preliminary findings, we still lack biological markers of ALS progression that can be applied to routine clinical practice and clinical trials. It is likely, however, that future search in this area will give us relevant new prognostic tools. Implication for clinical trials: Use of El Escorial classification for the enrolment of patients for clinical trials. In all recent trials, only patients with clinically definite, clinically probable or clinically probable-laboratory supported ALS were eligible for enrolment. However, it has been found that 20–44% of ALS patients are trial ineligible (i.e. they have a clinically possible or suspected ALS) at the time of diagnosis, and 5–10% of patients are still trial ineligible at death (24,87). Moreover, the median time from symptom onset to trial eligibility has been estimated to be 12.9 months (24). This observation questions the use of El Escorial Chio et al. Page 8 Amyotroph Lateral Scler. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 December 05. $watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text classification as criteria for trial eligibility, and indicates the need to revise some aspects of this classification. Patient stratification for placebo-controlled trials: The traditional stratification for clinical trials of ALS patients in bulbar and spinal onset is no longer sufficient and adequate. The factors to be included in stratification should also include age, respiratory status at entry, and a measure of disease progression pre-entry, such as the decline of ALSFRS-R score in a 3–6 month run-in period before recruitment. Moreover, recognizing the effect of PEG and NIPPV on ALS outcome, trial protocols should include guidelines for major interventions and ‘best clinical practice’ for ALS patients. It is clear that such requirements for the implementation of a clinical trial in ALS can be obtained only in medium-to-large size phase III studies. Another proposed approach is the use of a lead-in period in order to select a more homogeneous group of patients with a rapidly progressive disorder (88). Alternative methods for designing smaller phase II clinical trials should therefore be considered. Alternative trial designs: Since the use of placebo in such a severe disorder as ALS may be considered unethical, natural history controls have been advocated as an effective means to eliminate placebo in clinical trials in ALS (10,15,48,89). This approach may also reduce the number of patients that need to be recruited. The use of historical controls is quite frequent in oncology, where knowledge of prognostic factors derived from well-designed natural history studies allows accurate matching of cases and historical controls. However, regulatory agencies currently do not accept non-controlled trials for the purpose of registration of new drugs. Thus, clinical trials utilizing natural history controls are appropriate only for phase I and II clinical trials. An alternative approach to classical randomization, widely accepted in oncology for the implementation of small trials, is minimization, a method ensuring excellent balance between groups for a range of prognostic factors (90). With minimization, the treatment allocated to the next participant enrolled in the trial depends on the characteristics of those participants already enrolled. However, a requirement of this method is to establish ‘a priori’ all relevant prognostic factors and their respective weight (91). A different option for phase II trials could be the futility approach, i.e. designing studies to identify which agents are least likely to demonstrate benefits rather than the more typical goal of identifying the most promising agents. In this approach the null hypothesis is that treatment has promise and will therefore produce results exceeding a meaningful threshold (93). This approach considerably reduces the sample size, with a reduction of costs, and, more importantly, makes it possible to perform a large number of trials each with a reduced number of centres. Such a design is being implemented in a study on coenzyme Q10 in ALS (85). Again, however, the design of such studies should rely on the availability of hard endpoints. Therefore, the complete understanding of more relevant factors related to ALS outcome, including therapeutic interventions, remains a major goal of clinical research.

Received 08/18/2023 Review began 08/24/2023 Review ended 09/12/2023 Published 09/18/2023 © Copyright 2023 Hoxhaj et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License CC-BY 4.0., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Exploring Advancements in the Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: A Comprehensive Review of Current Modalities and Future Prospects Pranvera Hoxhaj , Natasha Hastings , Meet Popatbhai Kachhadia , Riya Gupta , Udeept Sindhu , Shreya A. Durve , Areeba Azam , María J. Auz Vinueza , Bhuvan . , Shwe H. Win , Deepak C. Rathod , Aiman P. Afsar 1. Medicine, University of Medicine, Tirana, Tirana, ALB 2. Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Scher & Kerenyi MDS, New York, USA 3. Medicine, St. George's University School of Medicine, St. George's, GRD 4. Internal Medicine, Pandit Dindayal Upadhyay (PDU) Medical College, Civil Hospital Campus, Rajkot, IND 5. Medicine and Surgery, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee Medical College and Research Institute, Bangalore, IND 6. Medicine and Surgery, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal, IND 7. General Medicine, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, IND 8. Medicine, Lahore Medical and Dental College, Lahore, PAK 9. Critical Care, Hospital de Especialidades de las Fuerzas Armadas N1, Quito, ECU 10. Internal Medicine, Government Medical College, Amritsar, Amritsar, IND 11. Medicine, University of Medicine, Magway, Magway, MMR 12. Medicine, Chandramma Dayanand Sagar Institute of Medical Education and Research, Harohalli, IND 13. Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, IND Corresponding author: Aiman P. Afsar, afsaraiman@gmail.com Abstract Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal and incurable disease requiring a multidisciplinary treatment approach and a collaborative therapeutic effort. A combination of both upper and lower motor neuron degeneration ultimately leads to respiratory failure, similar to other dementia-type neurodegenerative diseases. The aim of this paper is to pioneer current ALS research by carrying out a narrative literature review of the current treatment modalities of the disease. Through these efforts, we hope to condense the most pertinent information regarding current treatments and enhance the management of ALS patients as a whole, giving these patients a better quality of life as the search for a cure continues. We used a Pubmed search strategy and specific MeSH terms for the selection of the literature articles using the keywords "ALS," "new treatment," "treatment," and "symptomatic treatment." A combination of pharmaceutical interventions, psychological support, and physical rehabilitation has been most effective in enhancing the quality of life of patients with ALS (PALS). Among potential pharmacological therapies, only a few have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration(FDA) to be used to treat ALS and its symptoms. Other treatment modalities being considered include gene therapy, cellular therapy, psychological therapy, physical therapy, and speech therapy, alongside robotics, alternative feeding methods, and communication devices. Categories: Neurology, Therapeutics, Palliative Care Keywords: supportive care, robotics, pharmaceutical interventions, psychological support, cell therapy, gene therapy, neurodegenerative, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Introduction And Background Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rare neurological disease that affects motor neurons in the central nervous system, resulting in progressive degeneration and eventual death of these electrochemical connections. ALS causes a combination of upper and lower motor neuron disease, and the symptoms vary depending on the muscle controlled by the affected neurons and whether upper or lower motor neurons are predominantly affected. The main manifestations of upper motor neuron disease are muscle weakness, increased muscle tone and stiffness (spasticity), increased reflexes (hyperreflexia), and abnormal speech and swallowing [1]. In contrast, manifestations of lower motor neuron disease present as muscle wasting (atrophy) and twitching (fasciculations), loss of muscle tone (flaccid paralysis), and decreased reflexes (hyporeflexia). The exact cause of sporadic ALS is unknown. It has been hypothesized that dysfunctional and interconnected molecular mechanisms contribute to disease progression in ALS. Gene mutations, most commonly C9orf72, SOD1, TDP-43, FUS, and TBK-1, account for 15% of all patients with ALS (PALS). Of these mutations, the expansion that occurs in the C9orf72 gene accounts for 30-50% of familial ALS and 7% of sporadic ALS [2]. Affecting approximately 4.42 per 100,000 individuals, death from the illness usually occurs due to respiratory failure three to five years after the onset of symptoms. Males are slightly more affected by the disease than females [1]. Due to the inevitable fatal nature of this disease and its increasing incidence, resources have been allocated toward discovering treatment modalities that will positively affect patient outcomes and slow disease progression. Effective and safe treatment modalities that may change the progression of the disease remain elusive, with current management protocols used in clinical practice showing variable results in improving morbidity and mortality [3]. The diagnosis of ALS is suggested by clinical examination that reveals both upper and lower motor neuron failure. Electrodiagnosis analysis forms a crucial part of the diagnosis. A combination of both physical exams and clinical diagnostics is necessary 1, 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Open Access Review Article DOI: 10.7759/cureus.45489 How to cite this article Hoxhaj P, Hastings N, Kachhadia M, et al. (September 18, 2023) Exploring Advancements in the Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: A Comprehensive Review of Current Modalities and Future Prospects. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 for correctly diagnosing ALS. Conventional imaging studies, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans, are used to exclude other diseases that present similarly to ALS, demonstrating high levels of sensitivity [4,5]. Cellular therapy has shown substantial therapeutic potential in treating PALS over recent years. Still, the safety and efficacy of cellular therapy in PALS remain under debate [1]. Cellular therapies are working to optimize the dose required for treatment and to find an optimal dosing method that may further encourage full adherence to treatment by PALS. Another crucial component of the multidisciplinary approach to ALS management is physical therapy (PT). PT can address problematic symptoms of ALS, such as fatigue and muscle stiffness, through energy conservation and stretching exercises, respectively [3]. Restrengthening key respiratory muscle groups is undeniably necessary to delay fatality due to respiratory failure. PT has been shown to significantly improve the quality of life of PALS [6]. PALS experience a range of physical, emotional, and cognitive challenges, which can make it difficult to address all aspects of their care. Developing interventions that are tailored to treat the cognitive and behavioral side effects of ALS is complex. Further research is needed to develop nonpharmacological treatments that may reduce the psychological burden that comes with the disease for both PALS patients and their caregivers [7]. This narrative review synthesizes a wide range of research and expert opinions on ALS and its treatments into a concise and comprehensive overview, which includes pharmacological therapies, PT, respiratory support, and palliative care approaches. Overall, through this review, we aim to develop a vital reference tool capable of enhancing the understanding of ALS and aiding in the improvement of treatment outcomes. Review Methodology This is a narrative literature review of ALS and current treatment modalities of the disease based on articles obtained from PubMed using the keywords “ALS," "new treatment," "treatment," and "symptomatic treatment.” Using the search strategy involving "ALS diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, prevention and control, psychology, radiotherapy, rehabilitation, surgery, and therapy" as MeSH terms for the selection of the literature articles, we found 786 articles. Inclusion criteria involved primary research publications, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses published in English, focusing on the treatment of ALS in humans from the timeline spanning from 2015 to July 2023. Animal studies and studies without relevant outcomes were excluded. The titles and abstracts of the retrieved articles were screened independently by three reviewers to determine their relevance to the research topic and were narrowed down to 37 articles (). Full-text articles were further evaluated in detail. This narrative review has been done considering the current situation of PALS to determine the latest advancements in its treatment and their effectiveness compared to the conventional therapies available. This could have an impact on disease progression and thus the ability to influence the severity of possible complications. : PRISMA Flowchart Showing the Selection of Articles Results Although ALS remains incurable, effective management of symptoms and proactively addressing current clinical complications hold great significance for the patients affected by the disease. Fortunately, there is strong evidence suggesting that early detection of the disease contributes to extending patient survival. 2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 2 of 11 Given the heterogeneity of symptoms of ALS, supportive and palliative care can be provided by specialized multidisciplinary teams, composed of healthcare professionals providing care and support for the patients and their families. Our research reveals that treatments for PALS predominantly fall into two distinct categories. The first category includes pharmaceutical compounds that mainly influence disease progression, and the second category includes supportive and palliative care of the symptoms. Riluzole, the original US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved remedy for ALS, belongs to the benzothiazole class of drugs and acts as a glutamate antagonist that contributes to the death of upper and lower motor neurons in this disease. While riluzole can slow down the disease’s progression and impact muscle function deterioration, it only results in a minor increase in survival, spanning from three to six months [8,9]. Edaravone, the next FDA-approved medication for the treatment of ALS, works as a powerful antioxidant and scavenger of free radicals. While the exact way in which edaravone works to treat ALS is not fully understood, its antioxidant properties are thought to play a crucial role, as oxidative stress is a contributing factor to disease progression in PALS [10,11]. Sodium phenylbutyrate/taurursodiol is a medication approved for treating PALS because it reduces cellular stress pathways and promotes nerve cell survival. Patients treated with this medication have shown a slower decline in daily functioning and have longer overall survival rates compared with PALS treated with a placebo [12]. Tofersen is an approved RNA- based therapy designed to reduce the synthesis of superoxide dismutase type 1 (SOD1) protein by degrading toxic clumps of SOD1 mRNA (superoxide dismutase type-1 messenger ribonucleic acid). Tofersen initiation reduced neurofilament-axonal (nerve) injury and neurodegeneration and improved disease outcomes [13- 15]. The dextromethorphan hydrobromide/quinidine sulfate (DMQ) combination is a medication that is prescribed in patients with ALS to treat the underlying pseudobulbar affect (PBA). This treatment has been shown to improve three bulbar functions: swallowing, speech, and salivation. According to a trial study, both PALS groups treated with DMQ, regardless of having or not having PBA symptoms, showed impactful improvements in their total Center for Neurologic Study - Bulbar Function Scale (CNS-BFS) scores [16,17]. Some common therapy interventions that improve respiratory outcome measures and increase survival of PALS are cough augmentation, lung volume recruitment training, airway clearance techniques, assisted breath stacking, and manually assisted cough [18,19]. Dysphagia management and nutritional support involve detecting the evaluation of swallowing by fibro-endoscopy and fluoroscopy, changes in diet consistency, the loss of body weight, and indicating the start of alternative feeding methods such as percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) or jejunostomy [20]. Speech therapy is indicated in the initial stages. In advanced settings, speech therapy is accompanied by an electronic communication device (such as computers, telephones, voice output, and keyboard or head-eye-tracking devices) [21-23]. PT is an integral component of the ALS multidisciplinary team and is tailored to the individual’s needs and goals. Focusing on addressing the symptoms and maximizing function and participation can enable PALS to achieve a better quality of life. The most commonly used PT techniques for PALS are a range of motion (ROM), stretching, resistance, and aerobic exercises [6,24]. Psychological distress is a common experience for PALS, often leading to feelings such as anxiety, hopelessness, despair, demoralization, and depression. Effective psychological interventions should be used to assist the patient and their loved ones in managing the fear of death and dying and dealing with the challenges that arise due to visible changes in relationships and social roles. presents the symptom-wise pharmacological treatment of ALS. Indication Medication Dose Side Effects Spasticity Baclofen 5mg 1-3 times/day Hypotonia, drowsiness, nausea, vomiting, excessive sweating Nabiximols Buccal spray: 4-8 sprays/day Tachycardia, dizziness Tizanidine 2-4mg 2 times/day Hypotension, dizziness, asthenia, xerostomia Onabotilinum- toxin A Different units of intramuscular site injection Xerostomia, dry eyes, dropping eyebrows, headache, muscle weakness Cramps/Pain Tizanidine 2-4mg 2 times/day Hypotension, dizziness, asthenia, xerostomia Gabapentin Titrating from 100mg/day to 900mg 3 times/day orally Fatigue, arm and foot edema, mood changes, vomiting, blurred vision Levetiracetam 500-1000mg twice/day orally Fatigue, anxiety, headache, weight loss, sleepiness Mexiletine 150mg twice/daily orally, starting dose 150mg/day for 3 days Dizziness, hepatotoxicity, ataxia, nausea, vomiting Baclofen 5-10mg 3 times/day up to 80-120mg/day orally Drowsiness, hypotonia 2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 3 of 11 Quinine sulphate 260-325mg daily Abdominal pain, chills, tinnitus, impaired hearing Phenytoin 300mg daily orally Headaches, drowsiness, vomiting Vitamin E 400 UI (unite) /day orally Fatigue Modafinil 100-200mg/day in 1-2 doses orally Headache Sialorrhea N-acetylcysteine 200-400mg 3 times/day orally Rash, bronchospasms, chest tightness Scopolamine 1 transdermal patch every 3 days Tachycardia, xerostomia, hyperthermia, flushed skin, urinary retention, constipation Hyoscyamine 1-2 transdermal patches every 3 days, OR oral sustained release 0.375-0.75mg every 12 hours OR fast-acting 0.125- 0.25mg before meals Tachycardia, xerostomia, hyperthermia, flushed skin, urinary retention, constipation Atropine 0.4mg every 4-6 hours as sublingual drops Tachycardia, xerostomia, hyperthermia, flushed skin, urinary retention, constipation Glycopyrrolate 1-2mg 3 times/day orally Xerostomia, nasal congestion, flushing, constipation, nausea, vomiting Rimabotulinum- toxin B Parotid gland injection of 500-1500 units, submandibular gland injection of 250 units in each Dysphagia, xerostomia, antibody formation Pseudobulbar affect Amitriptyline Titration from 10-25mg/day orally to 10-150mg/day Sedation, suicidal thoughts and behavior Fluvoxamine 100-200mg/day orally Insomnia, headache, drowsiness, nausea, suicidal thoughts, and behavior Dextromethorphan quinidine 20 and 10mg/day for 7 days, then twice/day orally Diarrhea, nausea, weakness Anxiety Buspirone 10mg 3times/day orally Dizziness, headache, nausea, trouble sleeping Diazepam 2-10mg 3 times/day orally Drowsiness, headache, constipation, Lorazepam 0.5-1.0mg 2 times/day orally Mirtazapine 5-30 mg Drowsiness, constipation, headaches Depression SSRI antidepressants 20-100mg orally daily Tricyclic antidepressants 20-100mg dailly orally Bupropion 100mg 2 times/day orally Venlafaxine 37.5-75mg 2 or 3 times/day orally Urinary urgency Oxybutynin 2.5-5mg 2 times/day orally OR 3.9mg transdermal patches Headache, dry eyes, vomiting, stomachache, vertigo Tolterodine 1-2mg 2 times/day orally Vertigo, headache, xerostomia : Symptom-Wise Pharmacological Treatment of ALS Discussion ALS is an overwhelming neurodegenerative disease that affects patients physically and psychologically, 2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 4 of 11 reducing their quality of life and survival. Currently, there is no available cure for ALS. Scarcely any drugs have been approved by the FDA that can slow the course of the disease and improve the quality of life. Therefore, the management of ALS remains supportive and symptom-based. In recent years, research on new treatment strategies has increased, taking heed of gene therapy, cellular therapy, and neuroprotective agents. Pharmacological management There are limited approved drugs that slow disease progression by prolonging autonomy and increasing survival rates (measured by the ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS-R) [3]. Riluzole, (1,6-(Trifluoromethoxy)-2-Benzothiazolamine) A benzothiazole derivative was the first drug approved by the FDA for the treatment of ALS and has been used since 1995, showing a potentially beneficial effect for patients. Clinical studies have shown that riluzole treatment reduces the loss of motoneurons and increases survival by 9% in one year. This drug acts by multiple mechanisms to decrease excitotoxicity. It is thought that riluzole may have some neuroprotective effects. This is because its anti-glutamatergic agent inhibits the presynaptic release of neurotransmitter glutamate by acting as a specific sodium channel blocker on presynaptic neurons. In addition, it reduces the reuptake of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and enhances GABA receptors. Recent studies have associated riluzole with another mechanism of action (MOA). It inhibits protein kinase CK1δ catalytic activity, which avoids the cytoplasmic compartmentalization of TDP-43 (transactive response DNA binding protein of 43 k), resulting in the suppression of excitotoxicity. The recommended initial dose of riluzole for the treatment of ALS is 50 mg taken orally twice daily. After initiation of therapy, the dose can be increased to a maximum of 100 mg twice daily based on individual tolerance and clinical response. It is considered a well-tolerated drug among patients, even though it has shown some adverse effects, such as gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, and asthenia [1,3,25]. Edaravone (MCI-186) Twenty-two years later, in 2017, edaravone was the second compound to be FDA-approved for the treatment of ALS. It is a free radical scavenger that protects motor neurons from damage by free radicals and oxidative stress by eliminating lipid peroxyl radicals and peroxy nitrate [1]. There have been multiple trials that have studied the efficacy of this drug. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study with 137 participants proved the use of edaravone as an ALS treatment. It included only patients with early-stage ALS, defined as a disease duration of two years or less, a score of at least two for every item of the revised amyotrophic lateral sclerosis functional rating scale (ALSFRS-R), and forced vital capacity (FVC) of 80% or more, along with a probable or definite ALS diagnosis defined by the El Escorial criteria [3]. The study demonstrated a decrease in motor decline and motor neuron degeneration. Furthermore, edaravone efficacy has been demonstrated by its antioxidant properties and the ability to reduce mutant SOD1 accumulation. Edaravone’s chemical name is 3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-pyrazolin-5-one, and it is available as an intravenous (IV) infusion containing 30 mg edaravone in 100 mL of isotonic solution. The recommended dose of the initial treatment cycle with edaravone is 60 mg administered via 60-minute IV infusion once daily for 14 days, followed by a 14-day drug-free period. Subsequent treatment cycles consist of once-daily dosing for 10 of 14 days, each continued by a 14-day drug-free period. The drug is 92% protein-bound, primarily to albumin. The drug is metabolized in the liver and kidney. It is excreted mainly in the urine in its glucuronide conjugate form. Clinical trials have demonstrated that, even though edaravone has many side effects, it is a treatment that is well tolerated and, more importantly, decreases disease progression. Common adverse events include contusion, confusion, constipation, eczema, headache, bruising, gait disturbance, and contact dermatitis. Severe side effects were also present, such as hypersensitivity, dysphagia, sulfite allergic reactions, and anaphylaxis [10,11,26]. Sodium Phenylbutyrate and Taurursodiol Combination (Relyvrio) The combination of these drugs has exhibited an effect in reducing neuronal cell death and oxidative injury by diminishing stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondrial dysfunction. A reduction in disease progression has been documented with the use of both drugs. Sodium phenylbutyrate is an inhibitor of the histone deacetylase enzyme, which regulates transcription and allows normal protein aggregation. Studies in animal models showed that sodium phenylbutyrate improved cell survival. Moreover, clinical trials have demonstrated that this drug increases blood histone acetylation levels. The efficacy of Relyvrio (sodium phenylbutyrate and taurursodiol) was demonstrated in a 24-week, randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group study. In the trial, 137 PALS received either Relyvrio or a placebo. The study showed that the patients treated with Relyvrio experienced a slower rate of decline in the clinical assessment of daily functioning than those who received the placebo. Additionally, prolonged survival was observed in the long-term analysis of patients who received Relyvrio when compared to the placebo arm. Notable adverse reactions suffered by patients taking Relyvrio include upper respiratory tract infections, abdominal pain, nausea, and diarrhea. Relyvrio contains taurursodiol, a bile acid, which may cause worsening diarrhea in patients with additional disorders that interfere with bile acid metabolism. Taurursodiol is commonly used to treat chronic cholestatic liver diseases and gallstones. Its anti-apoptotic 2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 5 of 11 effect occurs through either regulating the expression of specific targets of apoptosis or mitochondrial membrane stabilization. This results in a neuroprotective effect and decreases disease progression. Sodium phenylbutyrate/taurursodiol has been developed as an oral suspension that contains 3 g of sodium phenylbutyrate and 1 g of taurursodiol. The drug was given once daily for three weeks, followed by twice a day [3,12,27,28]. Tofersen A SOD1 antisense oligonucleotide decreases the synthesis of SOD1 protein. The MOA occurs through the destruction of SOD1 mRNA. Through this mechanism, the drug reduces plasma neurofilament light (NfL), a biomarker of neurodegeneration and axonal injury. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial, tofersen reduced the levels of SOD1 proteins in the CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) by 36%. Earlier Tofersen initiation led to better measurement outcomes. These findings show a crucial clinical benefit in PALS. The reduction in NfL was consistent across all subgroups based on disease duration since symptom onset, site of symptoms, and use of other medications for ALS treatment. Patients were administered three initial doses of 100 mg (15 ml) of tofersen intrathecally at intervals of 14 days. After this, the therapy consists of a maintenance dose administered every 28 days. Treatment with torsefen showed moderate side effects: procedural pain, postlumbar syndrome related to lumbar puncture, headache, myalgia, and arthralgia [14,15]. Emerging modalities Gene Therapy Encouraging new treatment options for ALS include gene therapies that work by silencing the expression of harmful genes by replacing the mutated gene with the regular copy or editing the mutant genome, adding genes that introduce a protective or favorable factor, or adding genes with a knockout effect targeting RNA to decrease the expression of the causative gene [1]. Cellular Therapy It is a treatment modality consisting of both human and nonhuman cells that target multiple pathogenic mechanisms: host cell replacement, immunomodulation, neurotrophic factor secretion, and predominantly neuroinflammation. Seven major cell types are used: mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), embryonic stem cells, mononuclear cells, neural precursor cells, neural stem cells, glial stem cells, and induced pluripotent stem cells (IPSCs). Transplanted cells can be administered via different routes: intrathecal, intravenous, and intramuscular injection [1,2]. The aim is to make use of stem cells in the transplantation process where there is a displacement of dysfunctional motor neurons for the repair of the neuromuscular pathology of ALS. Experimental Stem Cell Therapies Stem cells play the most important role in the sustenance and regeneration of tissues in our body. Their exclusive properties include multipotency, self-restoration, and long-term survival. Stem cell therapies have proven to have encouraging results regarding the regeneration and replacement of neural tissues. Somatic cells of ALS patients can be reconfigured into IPSCs, which can generate certain neuronal stem cells. These IPSCs taken from PALS could play a major role in cell transplantation for the treatment of ALS and in understanding the pathophysiology of the disease [10]. NurOwn is a treatment in an experimental phase that uses MSCs, which are engineered to secrete neurotrophic factors that induce nerve regeneration by signaling neuron-neuron communication. It is deduced that injecting MSCs into the spinal canal showed a distinctive improvement in motor neuron survival. Analyses indicated a treatment benefit for patients with less severe ALS at the trial's start [29]. NeuroNata-R (lenzumestrocel) is an MSC-based therapy that uses intrathecal autologous bone marrow-derived MSC injections. The trial study showed significant therapeutic benefits lasting at least six months with safety in PALS [30]. AstroRx is a trial medication that contains nervous system support cells called astrocytes engineered from human embryonic stem cells. Findings from a small phase I/II study suggested that this experimental therapy may help slow ALS progression [31]. Other therapeutic strategies In the last few years, many therapies have been tested. Among them are axonal transport, posttranslational modification, DNA damage, nucleocytoplasmic transport, and molecular tweezers. Of the strategies mentioned, posttranslational changes (PTMs) are one of the therapies with more studies regarding their use in ALS treatment. PTMs influence proteins that are involved in ALS pathogenesis, such as FUS, SOD1, and TDP-43. Regarding the other therapies, axonal and nucleocytoplasmic transport strategies are currently being tested in clinical trials, with no clear understanding of their MOA. No clinical trials are addressing DNA damage [3]. Robotics 2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 6 of 11 There are striking technological innovations that are effective in the everyday use of ALS patients. Exoskeleton robotic devices are designed to enhance the gait capability of ALS patients. Such electromechanical wearable systems can be monitored via several aspects, such as speed, position, force, actuator, and algorithms, or by engaging electroencephalographic (EEG) signals or electromyographic (EMG) signals. Electric-powered wheelchairs, monitored through electro-optic tools, also proved to be helpful for ALS patients. In patients with restricted motor functions and severe disabilities, electrically adjusted beds can aid them with changing positions. Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) could also benefit ALS patients with severe disabilities [3]. Symptomatic Treatment Symptomatic management has been directed to reduce clinical features that affect the quality and expectancy of life. It focuses on treating symptoms such as pain, muscle spasticity, respiratory insufficiency, and mood disturbances. Approximately 75% of patients develop limb weakness, and 25% develop bulbar symptoms. As mentioned above, bulbar symptoms are characterized by weakness, tongue twitching, dysarthria, and dysphagia, the last two being the most common in ALS [1]. The Nuedexta treatment trial showed that the administration of dextromethorphan and quinidine improved pseudobulbar effects such as speech, swallowing, and salivation. Dextromethorphan is a sigma-1 receptor agonist that enhances serotonin uptake by inhibiting ion channel gates and potentiating ligand-gated channels. On the other hand, quinidine inhibits the cytochrome p450 isoenzyme, protecting dextromethorphan from o-demethylation. This increases the systematic bioavailability of dextromethorphan. At the beginning of the study, it was debatable whether DMQ treatment would improve impaired speech and swallowing in patients who did not exhibit pseudobulbar affect. However, it was found that all PALS, regardless of whether ALS disease was associated with or without PBA, experienced an equivalent improvement in their total CNS-BFS scores after DMQ treatment. Symptomatic frontal disinhibition (pseudobulbar affect), characterized by sudden episodes of crying and/or laughing, can also be treated by dextromethorphan hydrobromide and quinidine sulfate drugs that were approved by the FDA in 2011. The dextromethorphan hydrobromide and quinidine sulfate combination should be given at dosages of 20 mg and 10 mg, respectively [3,23]. Regarding the treatment of other symptoms that are present in ALS patients, spasticity can be treated by cannabinoids, tizanidine, and baclofen, and sialorrhea can be treated by botulin toxin injected into the salivary gland or anticholinergic medication. Medications such as magnesium supplements, quinine sulfate, gabapentin, or carbamazepine are aimed at treating muscle cramps [1]. Other symptoms that are present in ALS patients are treated with a variety of medications. For the treatment of spasticity, tizanidine, baclofen, and cannabinoids are used. For muscle cramps, magnesium supplements, gabapentin, carbamazepine, and quinine sulfate are used. Sialorrhea is treated by injecting botulin toxin into the salivary gland or anticholinergic medication [2]. PT In ALS, PT has to be considered a palliative and supportive healthcare arbitration. Palliative, symptomatic, and rehabilitative treatments are commonly delivered by an interdisciplinary team that consists of physical therapists, neurologists, nurses, and home healthcare support and can help improve the quality of life and change the end-of-life experience of patients and their families. There are three phases of disease progression in PALS: early (initial), middle, and late (terminal) phases. In the early phase, individuals can independently carry out their activities of daily living (ADLs). In the middle phase, mobility restriction is severe due to ALS progression. In the late phase, patients become completely dependent on mobility, respiratory issues, dysarthria, and dysphagia. It is important to note that exercise can significantly impact the health and well-being of those with neurodegenerative diseases. After diagnosis, one of the first steps to maximize the functionality of PALS is to prescribe such physical exercises. For PALS, physiotherapy can be customized to their specific requirements and needs. It can help address symptoms and maximize the functionality of PALS, allowing them to live life to the fullest. Commonly advised exercises for PALS include ROM and exercises that mainly involve stretching. To achieve therapeutic goals, strength training for muscles employing low-to-mild intensity and load, coupled with aerobic exercises, for example, stationary cycling, swimming, and walking, are some of the exercises frequently used to treat PALS. In the early and middle phases of ALS, strength training and aerobic exercises are considered more suitable for PALS. Moreover, it is crucial for physiotherapists to strike an equilibrium between underworking and overworking patients and to make accommodations according to their responses and other disease-related factors. PALS should be careful not to push themselves too much and to track any signs of overuse or fatigue in an exercise log that can be reviewed by their physical therapist. If any symptoms do occur, it is important to cease the exercises and re-evaluate with the physiotherapist [6,18,24]. Therapy for Bulbar Symptoms Management of dysphagia: Bulbar symptoms such as dysarthria and dysphagia are the most typical features 2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 7 of 11 of ALS and can dramatically reduce the quality of life. Dysphagia is commonly associated with aspiration, drooling, malnutrition (accompanied by weight loss), and dehydration. PALS patients who display bulbar symptoms experience more severe swallowing complications, such as aspiration. Swallowing dysfunction occurs because of the inefficacy of oral movements, laryngeal elevation, pharyngeal contraction, and restriction of tongue base movements. Early and personalized nutritional care should be provided to PALS in their initial phase of disease due to the weight loss associated with bulbar symptoms such as dysphagia. The loss of body fat and lean mass relates to the decreased energy reserve in PALS. Jejunostomy, or gastrotomy, is an alternative way of feeding PALS. The benefit of gastrotomy is enhanced nutrition, as nutrients come directly to the stomach via this procedure. These disabilities are examined by the use of instrumented methods, such as videofluoroscopy and fibroendoscopic evaluation of swallowing. Nutritional support is indicated in PALS that demonstrate severe problems with swallowing. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrotomy (PEG) tube placement is appropriate for PALS with dysphagia to administer proper medication and nutrition [20,32]. Management of dysarthria: Speech loss is a significant challenge for PALS and their loved ones, with dysarthria being the primary symptom in 25%-37% of cases and affecting over 80% of patients as the disease progresses. Effective treatment of dysarthria is crucial for providing multidisciplinary care for ALS. The most commonly used measures in the early stages include speech therapy, and in the advanced stages, communication devices are added. Electronic machines coupled with voice output or head/eye tracking systems can greatly improve communication speed and the character of life for PALS. Patients using communication devices reported little-to-no struggle with handling and found the devices to have a stronger impact on their character of life in comparison to speech therapy. Although speech therapy can be helpful in the initial phase of the disease, it slightly retards the inevitable deterioration in speech, which may explain why patients rate its impact lower. In contrast, communication devices can restore the communicative ability of PALS with advanced dysarthria/anarthria. Communication systems enhance the character of mood and life in individuals with ALS and should be given in the initial stage of the disease. With the use of communication devices, PALS can also cope with their depression and psychological distress. Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) can meet most of the objectives that are part of the palliative care of PALS. Communication is fundamental for human beings, and using communication devices to give some of these PALS the ability to express themselves again is monumental [21-23,33]. Management of respiratory problems: Chronic respiratory failure is one of the most common and incapacitating features accompanying PALS. Due to weakness in the bulbar, expiratory, and inspiratory muscles, PALS can take advantage of mechanical devices that cater to cough augmentation and ventilatory support. Initial symptoms related to weakness of respiratory muscles greatly vary and mainly involve shortness of breath, confusion, poor concentration, orthopnea, sleepiness in the daytime, fatigue, and morning headaches. Moreover, weakness of the expiratory muscle leads to reduced cough and clear secretion. As the disease advances, respiratory-related issues become more likely, and most PALS will eventually need some form of treatment. Physical therapists must prioritize asking PALS about symptoms of respiratory insufficiency during every clinical visit. Testing for maximum inspiratory pressure, sniff nasal pressure, vital capacity, peak cough expiratory flow, and vital capacity should be conducted at least every three months to ensure proper care. Noninvasive ventilation is the lifelong treatment for respiratory insufficiency in PALS. The use of noninvasive ventilation through a mouthpiece interface or mask can provide ventilatory support in PALS. Mechanically assisted cough can assist with secretion clearing and provide lung volume recruitment. Airway clearance treatment and noninvasive therapies are regarded as standard treatments for PALS with respiratory failure due to neuromuscular degeneration. Furthermore, pharyngeal and laryngeal complications are treated with various measures, such as breathing and voice exercises, compensatory techniques, body positioning, dietary modifications, and the close cooperation of a multidisciplinary team. PT also works to restrengthen the muscles controlling swallowing and can be a useful tool in avoiding pharyngeal complications [18,19,22,34]. Depression and distress management: There is considerable anxiety and depression felt among PALS and their families, along with additional financial and social burdens. Recommended psychological treatment consists of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) supplemented by various coping strategies and situational reappraisal skills. Patients need to be engaged in several healthy and interactive activities to effectively overcome their depression. The objective of CBT is to enhance cognitive and emotional processing in PALS. The character of the life of PALS can be enhanced by improving behavioral patterns through behavioral therapy. Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is predominantly focused on cognitive interventions. The ACT approach includes multiple techniques, such as motivational, acceptance, mindfulness, and behavior change approaches, to eliminate negative thoughts or emotions. These techniques help patients be aware of their present moments and committed actions and improve their psychological flexibility. It is fundamental to take into consideration the heavy care burden that patients' relatives are subjected to, which, in the long term, may affect their health and quality of life. ALS patients with severe disease progression may be offered and have access to palliative care, which can enhance not only patients' quality of life but also family caregivers. Mental health of ALS patients and family caregivers may also be taken into account, and psychotherapy strategies can diminish anxiety and depression and aid with the regrettable outcome of the disease [35-37]. Strengths and limitations 2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489 8 of 11 Our narrative review utilized a comprehensive search strategy, including specific keywords and MeSH terms, to gather relevant articles, which increased the likelihood of capturing a wide range of studies. To ensure that the selected articles were aligned with the research topic, explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria were established. The focus on the latest advancements in ALS treatment contributes to the relevance of the review’s findings. However, our review also has some limitations. One potential limitation is excluding non- English studies, which could introduce a language bias and omit valuable research conducted in other languages. Despite involving multiple reviewers, the review is susceptible to reviewer subjectivity during the article screening process. There is also the risk of publication bias, as the review might inadvertently include predominantly positive or significant findings while excluding studies with null or nonsignificant results. Finally, this research paper distinguishes itself through its pioneering approach as one of the few studies in the field of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis treatment. In conclusion, this review not only expands the horizons of research but also holds promise for positively impacting the lives of PALS and shaping the trajectory of future scientific investigations. Conclusions ALS is a severe, debilitating, and ultimately fatal illness despite the tremendous multidisciplinary commitment to seeking a cure and a plethora of treatment studies. The advantages of currently approved therapies are modest. In this review, we looked at ALS and the current treatment modalities that are used in a range of clinical settings. We have identified several plausible factors that may be contributing to the high failure rates present in ALS clinical trials, including but not limited to the selection of the incorrect cellular target, defective clinical trial design, patient selection bias, inadequate medication exposure, lack of compliance, and how uncommon ALS is in the general population, further complicating participation in trials. Although various medications have shown efficacy in animal models of ALS, none have significantly increased longevity or improved the quality of life in PALS. One of the drugs used to treat ALS is riluzole, an anti-glutamatergic substance. In recent advances, edaravone, an antioxidant and free radical scavenger, has been shown to reduce oxidative stress and delay illness onset. Another licensed drug that improves overall survival and day-to-day functioning is sodium phenylbutyrate/taurursodiol. Other therapeutic strategies, such as posttranslational modification, are also being researched for their potential advantages in ALS treatment. Nonpharmacological therapies, such as robotics, therapy for bulbar symptoms, communication devices, rehabilitation, PT, and stem cell therapy, require increased attention. They are essential in maximizing functional abilities and improving the overall well-being of PALS. One of the significant challenges for PALS is the prevalence of mental burdens, such as fear, anxiety, and depression. Effective psychological therapies included and integrated into palliative care principles can help patients overcome or cope with fear, anxiety, and loneliness and contribute to an improved end-of-life experience for both patients and their families. Researchers are conducting numerous trials to develop a cure for ALS. Further research is urgently needed to identify new therapeutics that go beyond drug repurposing methods to combat ALS effectively. Because ALS is caused by a variety of factors, different agents can be used to target various factors, which could open new doors for treatment. In terms of emerging treatment modalities, gene therapy and cellular therapy have been shown to target multiple pathogenic mechanisms and enhance clinical function and muscle strength. There is a growing need for more clinical trials on different kinase inhibitors that can suppress neuroinflammation and inhibit apoptosis. Additional Information Disclosures Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work. Acknowledgements PH, NH, and APA conceptualized the review and drafted and edited the manuscript. PH and NH worked equally on the manuscript and should be considered co-first authors. MPK and RG worked on the methodology and drafted the manuscript. US and SD brought out the initial results and drafted the manuscript. AA, MJ, BH, SH, and DC worked on the discussion and conclusion and drafted the manuscript. APA supervised the project. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. All authors agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.

Clinical description Approximately two thirds of patients with typical ALS have a spinal form of the disease (limb onset) and present with symptoms related to focal muscle weakness and wasting, in which onset of symptoms may start either distally or proximally in the upper and lower limbs. Gradually, spasticity may develop in the weakened atrophic limbs, affecting manual dexterity and gait. Patients with bulbar onset ALS usually present with dysarthria and dysphagia for solids or liquids. Limb symptoms can develop almost simultaneously with bulbar symptoms, and in the vast majority of cases will occur within 1-2 years. Paralysis is progressive and leads to death due to respiratory failure within 2-3 years for bulbar onset cases and 3-5 years for limb onset ALS cases. Management and treatment The management of ALS is supportive, palliative, and multidisciplinary. Non-invasive ventilation prolongs survival and improves quality of life. Riluzole is the only drug that has been shown to extend survival.

Citation: Rizea, R.E.; Corlatescu, A.-D.; Costin, H.P.; Dumitru, A.; Ciurea, A.V. Understanding Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Advances. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/ijms25189966 Academic Editor: Elisabetta Pupillo Received: 1 August 2024 Revised: 12 September 2024 Accepted: 13 September 2024 Published: 15 September 2024 Copyright: © 2024 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/). International Journal of Molecular Sciences Review Understanding Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Advances Radu Eugen Rizea 1,2 , Antonio-Daniel Corlatescu 1 , Horia Petre Costin 1 , Adrian Dumitru 1,3,4,* and Alexandru Vlad Ciurea 1,5 1 Department of Neurosurgery, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, “Carol Davila”, 020021 Bucharest, Romania; radu.rizea@umfcd.ro (R.E.R.); antonio.corlatescu0920@stud.umfcd.ro (A.-D.C.); horia-petre.costin0720@stud.umfcd.ro (H.P.C.); prof.avciurea@gmail.com (A.V.C.) 2 Department of Neurosurgery, “Bagdasar-Arseni” Clinical Emergency Hospital, 041915 Bucharest, Romania 3 Department of Morphopathology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, “Carol Davila”, 020021 Bucharest, Romania 4 Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, 050098 Bucharest, Romania 5 Sanador Clinical Hospital, 010991 Bucharest, Romania * Correspondence: vasile.dumitru@umfcd.ro Abstract: This review offers an in-depth examination of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), address- ing its epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical presentation, diagnostic techniques, and current as well as emerging treatments. The purpose is to condense key findings and illustrate the complexity of ALS, which is shaped by both genetic and environmental influences. We reviewed the literature to discuss recent advancements in understanding molecular mechanisms such as protein misfolding, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and axonal transport defects, which are critical for identifying potential therapeutic targets. Significant progress has been made in refining diagnos- tic criteria and identifying biomarkers, leading to earlier and more precise diagnoses. Although current drug treatments provide some benefits, there is a clear need for more effective therapies. Emerging treatments, such as gene therapy and stem cell therapy, show potential in modifying disease progression and improving the quality of life for ALS patients. The review emphasizes the importance of continued research to address challenges such as disease variability and the limited effectiveness of existing treatments. Future research should concentrate on further exploring the molecular foundations of ALS and developing new therapeutic approaches. The implications for clinical practice include ensuring the accessibility of new treatments and that healthcare systems are equipped to support ongoing research and patient care. Keywords: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS); therapeutic approaches; gene therapy; stem cell therapy; biomarkers; neurodegeneration 1. Introduction Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that impacts the central nervous system and poses significant challenges in diagnosis, particularly during its initial stages. Due to its rarity, physicians frequently prioritize more common diseases, resulting in diagnostic delays. Although the prevalence of ALS is low because of the short life expectancy of affected individuals, the lifetime risk of developing ALS is approximately 1 in 350 [1]. Identifying the diverse symptoms of ALS and recognizing it as a complex syndrome that often includes behavioral changes may aid in earlier diagnosis. Improvements in diagnostic criteria and the identification of genetic risk factors are also expected to accelerate the diagnostic process [2]. Diagnosing ALS remains a significant challenge, with little change in the diagnostic approach over the past decade. Despite the increased use of genetic testing, clinical history Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25189966 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 2 of 21 and examination are still the primary methods for confirming an ALS diagnosis. On aver- age, it takes between 10 and 16 months from the onset of symptoms to receive a definitive diagnosis. This delay is attributed to the rarity and unfamiliarity of ALS, incomplete symptom recognition, and the lack of early specialist involvement [3]. Furthermore, the prognosis for ALS patients is poor, as the factors influencing disease progression are not fully understood. To facilitate earlier diagnosis and improve outcomes, ongoing research is focusing on new ALS criteria and scoring systems, as well as the development of emerging biofluid markers, imaging techniques, and electrophysiological measurements. Recent advances in understanding the genotype-phenotype expression of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) have aligned clinical, pathological, and genetic observations within families, reveal- ing several presentation patterns predominantly associated with autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance [4]. The first pattern observed involves a rapid decline in motor function within five years, characterized by anterior horn cell (AHC) loss and corticospinal tract (CST) de- generation. A second pattern, clinically similar to the first, includes additional postmortem changes in the posterior columns, Clarke’s column, and spinocerebellar tracts. A third pattern, also similar to the second, features a longer survival period of over 10–20 years. Patients with FALS associated with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (FTD-ALS) exhibit multisystem manifestations, known as ALS-plus syndromes [5], which encompass cog- nitive and neurobehavioral impairments in addition to motor symptoms. These patients often experience bulbar-onset ALS and pathogenic gene expansions or mutations twice as frequently, resulting in generally shorter survival compared to those without ALS-plus syndromes. In rare cases, some FALS patients experience onset in their early teens, which is particularly devastating. 2. Epidemiology and Risk Factors The incidence of ALS increases with age, reaching its peak between 60 and 79 years, though variations can occur based on ancestral background [6–8]. While some research suggests that incidence rates have remained stable over the past few decades [1], other studies indicate a potential increase [9,10]. These perceived changes might stem from improved diagnostic methods or evolving reporting standards, underscoring the impor- tance of well-maintained population registries. Whether ALS incidence has significantly changed in the last twenty years remains uncertain, but it is expected to rise with the aging population [11]. Additionally, the prevalence of ALS is projected to increase due to an aging population and advancements in disease management that support longer life expectancy [11,12]. ALS incidence also varies by sex, with an overall standardized male-to-female ratio of 1.35, influenced by the age at onset [13]. Genetics is another contributing factor; heritability is higher in mother-daughter pairs [1], and the most common ALS risk gene, C9ORF72, results in an earlier onset in males compared to females [14]. Therefore, ALS development is driven by a complex interaction of age, sex, and genetic factors [15], which has significant implications for both preclinical and clinical research, as well as clinical trials. ALS incidence is influenced by ancestral background and biological sex, with vari- ations seen across different age groups [15]. Although the disease is more prevalent in males, heritability appears to be higher among females, particularly with the highest con- cordance observed in female–female parent–offspring pairs [1]. Additionally, males with the C9ORF72 repeat expansion typically experience the onset of ALS approximately two years earlier than females with the same genetic marker [14]. Thus, the risk of developing ALS is shaped by a complex interplay of age, sex, and genetic factors [15]. These sex-based disparities underscore the importance of considering sex as a factor in both preclinical and clinical research to fully understand its impact, as well as in ALS clinical trials for the development of targeted treatments. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is influenced by both genetic and environmental factors. Familial ALS (FALS) accounts for 5–10% of cases, while the remaining 90–95% Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 3 of 21 are sporadic ALS (SALS). Men are more likely to develop ALS than women, with a risk ratio ranging from 1.3 to 1.56 times higher. Various factors have been investigated to understand their impact on ALS risk, including smoking, physical activity, and exposure to metals, pesticides, and electromagnetic fields. Smoking has been consistently linked to an increased risk of ALS. However, the relationship between physical activity, particularly intense sports, and ALS remains unclear. Work-related exposure to metals such as lead and mercury has been proposed as a potential risk factor for ALS in several studies. Additionally, military service, especially during the Gulf War, has been associated with a higher incidence of ALS, possibly due to environmental exposures like high selenium levels from oil fires. Traumatic brain injuries and occupations involving electrical work have also been examined as risk factors, but the findings are mixed. These insights underscore the complex interplay between genetic predisposition and environmental factors in the development of ALS [16,17]. 3. Pathophysiology It is increasingly evident that a well-functioning protein degradation system is crucial for cellular health. In mammalian cells, protein degradation occurs via two primary pathways: the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and autophagy mechanisms. The UPS primarily degrades small, soluble proteins that are tagged for destruction, whereas autophagy handles the clearance of larger protein complexes. Although this suggests that enhancing autophagy might be an effective strategy for removing toxic TDP-43 aggregates, the formation and progression of these aggregates beyond protein monomers may point to an initial dysfunction in the UPS. Furthermore, TDP-43 inclusions are known to accumulate when both UPS and autophagy are inhibited [18–21]. Up to 10% of ALS patients have at least one other affected family member, classifying their condition as familial ALS (fALS), which is almost always inherited in an autosomal dominant manner [22]. Although over 50 potentially causative or disease-modifying genes have been identified, the most frequent pathogenic variants occur in SOD1, C9ORF72, FUS, and TARDBP, with disease-causing variants in other genes being relatively uncommon [23]. The prevalence of ALS cases attributed to variants in these common ALS-linked genes varies between European and Asian populations. Genetic risk factors are thought to significantly contribute to sporadic ALS (sALS), with twin studies estimating heritability at around 60% [24]. Despite numerous genetic association studies, identifying heritable genetic risk factors in sALS remains challenging. The method of genetic diagnosis may also contribute to the apparent missing heri- tability in ALS. Genetic diagnosis is often conducted through whole exome sequencing, which can miss crucial intronic and intergenic variants. An increase in rare variants, many of unknown significance, has been found in the untranslated regions of known disease- causing genes, including SOD1, TARDBP, FUS, VCP, OPTN, and UBQLN2, highlighting the potential importance of regulatory gene regions in determining disease pathogenesis and making genetic diagnoses [25]. Heritability can also be difficult to determine due to the incomplete penetrance of variants in many ALS-associated genes. For example, C9ORF72 and ATXN2 variants exhibit incomplete penetrance, with symptoms not always manifesting in mutation carriers [14,26]. This can cause inherited cases to appear sporadic. A substantial portion of the genetic risk for sALS remains unidentified; as a result, much research has focused on understanding how variations and differences in the expres- sion of known ALS-linked genes lead to the disease. The genes SOD1, TARDBP, FUS, and C9ORF72 have been the most extensively studied. In the field of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s (AD-PD-HD), and ALS neuroinflammation has emerged as a crucial factor driving the progression of neuronal degeneration. Research has increasingly highlighted the significant role that chronic inflammation in the brain plays in exacerbating these conditions. Multiple studies have shown that cannabinoids possess properties that can effectively reduce this neuroinflammatory burden. These compounds, derived from the cannabis plant, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 4 of 21 interact with the endocannabinoid system in the brain, which is involved in regulating inflammation and neuroprotection. By modulating immune responses and reducing inflam- matory cytokines, cannabinoids have demonstrated potential in mitigating the harmful effects of neuroinflammation. This growing body of evidence suggests that cannabinoid- based therapies could offer promising new avenues for treating neurodegenerative diseases by addressing one of their key underlying mechanisms [27]. 4. Protein Misfolding and Aggregation: Role of C9ORF72, TDP-43, SOD1, FUS 4.1. C9ORF72 The hexanucleotide repeat expansion is located in the first intron of the C9ORF72 gene. The actual sizes of these repeats vary significantly among C9ORF72 patients. Although the threshold for pathogenic repeat size remains unknown, a cutoff of 30 repeats is commonly used in most studies. Healthy individuals typically have fewer than 11 repeats, while most patients exhibit several hundreds to thousands of repeats [28]. A small subset of patients also display shorter expansions ranging from 45 to 80 repeats [29]. The repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene is a major genetic factor in ALS and FTD, accounting for approximately 40% of familial ALS (FALS), 30% of familial FTD (FFTD), and about 8% of sporadic ALS (SALS) cases, particularly in predominantly Caucasian populations. The discovery of the C9ORF72 mutation in ALS and FTD has led scientists to explore its potential involvement in other neurodegenerative disorders as well [30]. Regarding cell type distribution, C9ORF72 expression is notably high in myeloid cells, particularly in CD14+ monocytes, eosinophils, and neutrophils, while it is lower in lymphoid cells and other tissues. Overall, the C9ORF72 protein is mainly expressed in the brain, spinal cord, and immune system, with lower levels detected in other organs such as the lungs, heart, liver, kidney, and skeletal muscle, reflecting the transcript’s expression profile [31]. The C9ORF72 gene transcribes three distinct mRNA isoforms (V1–V3), which encode two proteins: C9ORF72-long (C9-L), a 481-amino acid protein, and C9ORF72-short (C9-S), a truncated protein isoform of 222 amino acids [32]. The 481-amino acid C9-L isoform is the most abundant. In mouse tissues and the human brain, C9ORF72 is predominantly cytoplasmic, with punctate staining in neurites, indicative of synaptic terminals. C9ORF72 also plays a role in stress granule (SG) formation and degradation [33]. Stress granules (SGs) are membraneless ribonucleoproteins that contain mRNA and accumulate in the cytoplasm when translation initiation is halted, disappearing once stress is alleviated [34]. Upon stress-related stimuli, C9-L is recruited to SGs. In the absence of C9ORF72, these granules fail to form, and other SG-associated proteins like TIA-1, G3BP1, and HuR are downregulated. C9ORF72 is also crucial for cellular recovery post-stress, as it interacts with p62 to target SGs for autophagy-mediated degradation [35]. Moreover, C9-L interacts with SMCR8 through its DENN (differentially expressed in normal cells and neoplasia) domain, and when the C9-L-SMCR8 complex associates with WDR41, it functions as a GTPase-activating protein potentially involved in membrane trafficking, including endolysosomal pathways and autophagy [36]. The loss of C9ORF72 in mice and motor neurons derived from iPSCs leads to synaptic plasticity alterations and defects in glutamate receptor homeostasis [37]. Recent studies have also implicated C9ORF72 in regulating neuronal nucleocytoplasmic transport by disrupting interactions between importin β1 and nucleoporin [38]. According to a study conducted by Celona et al., the expansion of a six-nucleotide GGGGCC repeat in the first intron of the C9ORF72 gene is the most prevalent inherited cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). These repeated sequences in RNA can aggregate within cells and are translated through a mech- anism called repeat-associated non-AUG (RAN) translation, producing dipeptide-repeat (DPR) proteins that are highly toxic. The study reveals that the zinc finger RNA-binding protein Zfp106 plays a critical role in counteracting these harmful effects. Zfp106 was Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 5 of 21 shown to prevent the formation of RNA foci, substantially decrease RAN translation driven by GGGGCC repeats, and inhibit the accumulation of toxic DPRs in cells derived from C9ORF72 patients. Additionally, the study found that Zfp106 binds to RNA G-quadruplex structures, inducing a change in their conformation. This binding appears to be a key factor in Zfp106’s ability to mitigate the cytotoxic effects associated with GGGGCC repeats, highlighting its potential as a therapeutic target for C9ORF72-linked ALS and FTD [39]. There is widespread agreement that the arginine-rich dipeptide repeats (DPRs), specif- ically glycine-arginine (GR) and proline-arginine (PR), exhibit the highest neurotoxicity across multiple model systems [40]. Due to the growing interest in these arginine-rich DPRs, there has been a greater focus on PR, GR, or both, compared to other DPRs. Conse- quently, several mechanisms have been associated with PR and GR expression, including nucleocytoplasmic transport [41,42], DNA damage [43,44], translational disruption [45], and stress granule dysfunction [46]. Drosophila models have been particularly valuable in elucidating these toxic mechanisms, which have subsequently been validated in mouse models, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), and patient tissues. Recent advancements with fly models continue to prioritize research on repeat- associated non-AUG (RAN) translation and DPRs, given their role in C9orf72 hexanu- cleotide repeat expansions. Factors regulating RAN translation are under investigation, with a proposed mechanism of DPR-induced toxicity in C9orf72-associated neurodegenera- tion involving inhibited translation through interactions between ribosomal proteins and DPRs, specifically poly-GR and poly-PR. Emerging evidence indicates that the three primary hypotheses regarding DPR toxicity are not mutually exclusive. For example, one study demonstrated that reduced C9orf72 activity heightens susceptibility to degenerative stimuli, such as glutamate-induced excito- toxicity and impaired DPR clearance [47]. Essentially, haploinsufficiency intensifies toxic gain-of-function effects, a finding supported by studies showing that C9orf72 reduction suppresses autophagy, leading to DPR accumulation and neuronal death [48,49]. Research on autophagy in Drosophila C9orf72 models has shown that, in motor neu- rons, 30-repeat DPRs disrupt the morphology and dynamics of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), impairing autophagosome formation. Despite ER disruption in both axons and synapses, autophagosomes remained intact in axons, although their biogenesis was hin- dered at synaptic terminals [50]. Motor neurons can also be analyzed for synaptic dysfunction. A recent study using Drosophila C9orf72 revealed a novel cell-autonomous excitotoxicity mechanism selectively associated with arginine-rich DPRs in glutamatergic neurons. These DPRs—poly-GR and poly-PR—exhibited moderate toxicity at 36 repeats, increasing synaptic boutons, active zones, extracellular glutamate, intracellular calcium, and presynaptic NMDA receptor activation [51]. This suggests a pathway to neurodegeneration via glutamate excitotox- icity and synaptic overgrowth, which was presynaptic NMDA receptor-dependent and, therefore, cell-autonomous. More toxic 100-repeat DPRs led to the loss of active zones, indicating severe neurodegeneration through synaptic degeneration [51]. These findings support the potential of glutamate inhibition therapies and underscore the need for further investigation into synaptic dysfunction in C9orf72-FTD pathology. 4.2. TDP-43 TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is a vital RNA/DNA-binding protein involved in various aspects of RNA metabolism, including transcription, splicing, and transport. In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), TDP-43 is primarily associated with its pathological forms. In ALS, TDP-43 mislocalizes from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it forms insoluble and ubiquitinated inclusions. These pathological aggregates are a hallmark of both ALS and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). The misfolding and aggregation of TDP-43 are driven by mutations in the TARDBP gene, post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation and ubiquitination, and its tendency to form amyloid-like fibrils. This mislocalization disrupts RNA processing and cellular homeostasis, leading to neu- Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 6 of 21 ronal toxicity. Understanding the mechanisms underlying TDP-43 pathology is crucial for developing targeted therapies for ALS [52,53]. A proposed model for TDP-43 toxicity utilizing Drosophila suggests that the cyto- plasmic accumulation of human TDP-43 (hTDP-43) in adult flies is sufficient to induce degeneration. This finding aligns with other models of toxicity related to the mislocalization of ALS-associated genes. Additionally, the study observed that the knockdown of TBPH, the Drosophila homolog of TDP-43, did not produce any phenotypic changes, indicating that a toxic gain of function due to cytoplasmic TDP-43 may contribute to pathogenesis. However, this hypothesis remains uncertain, as a loss of nuclear TDP-43 function might also play a role in the development of the disease [54]. Another proposed model of toxicity in Drosophila involves mitochondrial dysfunction. In transgenic flies expressing human TDP-43 (hTDP-43) induced by heat shock through the Elav-Gal4 pan-neuronal driver, the mitochondria in the eye exhibited a marked reduction in size compared to controls. Additionally, 85% of the mitochondria in the photoreceptors of hTDP-43-expressing flies displayed swollen or vesicular cristae. This damage to the mitochondrial cristae mirrors that observed in the brain tissues of patients with hTDP- 43 proteinopathy, underscoring the utility of Drosophila as a model for studying this gene. Given that mitochondria are a known source of reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial dysfunction can lead to ROS accumulation, negatively impacting neuronal survival and function. Elevated levels of mitochondrial ROS were detected in hTDP-43- expressing motor neurons in Drosophila via confocal imaging, suggesting that hTDP-43 expression in motor neurons induces mitochondrial dysfunction and may contribute to oxidative stress [55]. 4.3. SOD1 The SOD1 gene (encoding superoxide dismutase 1 [Cu/Zn]) was the first to be linked to ALS in 1993 [56]. SOD1 encodes a metalloenzyme composed of 153 amino acids and is one of three superoxide dismutase enzymes in humans. This protein binds copper and zinc and forms a highly stable homodimer. SOD1 dimers are located in the cytosol and the intermembrane space of mitochondria, playing a crucial role in antioxidant defense by catalyzing the conversion of superoxide radicals, produced during cellular respiration, into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide [57]. Superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) is crucial in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Mutations in the SOD1 gene are a primary genetic cause of familial ALS, accounting for approximately 20% of these cases. These mutations result in the misfolding and aggregation of the SOD1 protein, which is highly toxic to motor neurons. The toxic effects are believed to arise from a combination of factors, including oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and disruption of protein homeostasis. Mutant SOD1 proteins can form aggregates that interfere with cellular processes, disrupt mitochondrial function by localizing to the outer mitochondrial membrane, and induce apoptosis. Additionally, the presence of misfolded SOD1 has been shown to enhance the aggregation of other ALS- associated proteins, such as TDP-43, further amplifying the neurodegenerative process. Understanding SOD1’s role in ALS has been pivotal for developing targeted therapies aimed at reducing oxidative stress and improving mitochondrial function to slow disease progression [58]. Drosophila melanogaster models have been pivotal in elucidating the role of the SOD1 gene in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). As the first gene linked to familial ALS (fALS), SOD1 encodes the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase-1. By leveraging genetic tools to express human SOD1 (hSOD1) and its ALS-associated mutations in specific Drosophila tissues, researchers have uncovered key insights into the disease’s mechanisms. These models demonstrate that hSOD1 mutations can trigger both loss of function (LOF) and toxic gain of function (GOF) effects, leading to neurodegeneration characterized by motor dysfunction, reduced lifespan, and synaptic abnormalities. Notably, despite severe phenotypes such as developmental defects and impaired locomotion, these models often Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 7 of 21 lack significant neuronal death, differing from vertebrate observations. This highlights the complexity of SOD1-linked ALS and underscores the value of Drosophila in studying the disease’s molecular and cellular underpinnings. Additionally, these models have been instrumental in screening potential therapeutic compounds, identifying agents that may alleviate the neurotoxic effects of mutant SOD1 [59]. Moreover, a study conducted by Liguori et al. (2024), utilizing Drosophila models expressing the human mutant SOD1 genes (A4V and G85R), demonstrated that these mutations lead to reduced survival and impaired motor performance, concurrently with the induction of early neuroinflammatory markers, such as the glial marker Repo, and the upregulation of immune pathways involving antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Moreover, the study shed light on the heightened oxidative stress and the presence of chromosome aberrations, indicating that genomic instability and altered cellular homeostasis represent some of the most important moments in the early stages of ALS pathogenesis. These findings challenge the prevailing notion that motor neuron degeneration is the primary initiating factor in ALS, instead emphasizing the possibility that early neuroinflammation and oxidative stress may precede and potentially precipitate the cascade of neuronal damage, thereby suggesting new opportunities for early therapeutic intervention [60]. Furthermore, a study conducted by Scaricamazza et al [61]. showed that endurance exercise in female mice can lead to the aggravation of the SOD1-G93A ALS onset since it induces a more oxidative phenotype in muscle fibers, exacerbating muscle denervation, and promoting motor neuron loss. Additionally, due to increased immune cell infiltration in the sciatic nerve, the progression of ALS is accelerated. Therefore, despite the fact that physical exercises are a healthy habit, endurance exercises represent risk factors when it comes to ALS [61]. 4.4. FUS FUS encodes a universally expressed protein of 526 amino acids, part of the FET family of RNA-binding proteins. Under normal conditions, FUS is mainly located in the nucleus but can move to the cytoplasm, where it plays a role in nucleocytoplasmic transport [62,63]. FUS has several roles similar to TDP-43, including involvement in gene expression, transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, RNA transport, and regulation of translation [64]. However, despite these similarities, TDP-43 and FUS target different RNAs and have unique sequence binding specificities [65]. As of now, researchers have identified more than 50 distinct variants of the FUS gene that are linked to autosomal dominant forms of ALS. The majority of these genetic alterations are missense mutations, which involve single amino acid changes. However, there have also been less common cases where insertions, deletions, splicing errors, or nonsense mutations have been observed in patients. These various mutations contribute to the diversity of genetic presentations seen in ALS associated with FUS gene anomalies [66]. Many pathogenic variants are located within the nuclear localization signal, leading to the mislocalization of FUS to the cytoplasm. Other mutations occur in regions rich in glycine and arginine, the prion-like domain, and the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) [67]. Some variants in these regions increase the likelihood of the protein forming solid aggregates, indicating multiple pathogenic mechanisms in FUS-related ALS [68]. RNA homeostasis, or “ribostasis”, is as essential as proteostasis. Disruptions in RNA metabolism can cause toxicity in various ways, some of which are linked to proteostasis. As per the central dogma of molecular biology, RNA acts as the “messenger” between DNA and the protein synthesis machinery, implicating RNA in the pathogenicity of protein misfolding diseases like ALS. However, RNA’s lifecycle is complex, involving numerous regulatory RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that play crucial roles in RNA transport, post- transcriptional editing, translation, and degradation [69]. Furthermore, RNA and RBPs can form membraneless organelles called ribonuclear protein (RNP) granules, which are vital for RNA metabolism and gene regulation [70]. The functions of these RNP granules vary depending on the specific RNA and RBPs they contain. Recent studies have focused Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 8 of 21 on particular RNPs, such as stress granules and paraspeckles, both of which have been implicated in ALS pathogenesis. The role of stress granules, in particular, has been debated as a key factor in ALS-related aggregation. However, since ALS can develop independently of stress granules, they will not be further examined here as a therapeutic target, though they have been reviewed in other works [71–74]. The regulation and maintenance of RNA pathways via RBPs and RNP granules are crucial for cellular homeostasis. Notably, several strong genetic links to ALS have been found in RNA metabolism pathways, including mutations in C9ORF72, SOD1, TDP-43, and FUS. These mutations and others underscore the importance of RNA production, editing, and localization in the onset of ALS, providing convincing evidence that deregulated RNA metabolism plays a significant role in the disease. The following sections will emphasize the significance of RBPs and RNP granule formation in ALS and their potential as therapeutic targets to restore proper RNA metabolism and proteostasis in ALS patients [75,76] (). . Summary table of the genes described. Gene Aspect Details C9ORF72 Hexanucleotide Repeat Expansion Located in the first intron of the C9orf72 gene C9ORF72 Pathogenic Repeat Size Unknown, but a cutoff of 30 repeats is used in studies C9ORF72 Healthy Individuals Repeat Size Typically fewer than 11 repeats C9ORF72 Patient Repeat Size Several hundreds to thousands, some with 45−80 repeats C9ORF72 Repeat Expansion Contribution in ALS 40% of familial ALS (FALS), 8% of sporadic ALS (SALS) C9ORF72 Repeat Expansion Contribution in FTD 30% of familial FTD (FFTD) C9ORF72 Cell Type Expression Distribution High in myeloid cells, lower in lymphoid cells and other tissues C9ORF72 Primary Organs of Expression Mainly in brain, spinal cord, immune system; lower in lungs, heart, liver, kidney, skeletal muscle C9ORF72 mRNA Isoforms Three isoforms (V1−V3) C9ORF72 Proteins Encoded C9ORF72-long (C9-L), C9ORF72-short (C9-S) C9ORF72 Abundant Isoform C9-L (481 amino acids) C9ORF72 Protein Localization Predominantly cytoplasmic with punctate staining in neurites C9ORF72 Function in Stress Granules Involved in formation and degradation C9ORF72 Protein Interaction (SMCR8) Interacts through its DENN domain, involved in membrane trafficking and autophagy C9ORF72 Implication in Neurodegenerative Disorders Linked to ALS, FTD, and potential other neurodegenerative disorders TDP-43 RNA Metabolism and Aggregation RNA-binding, mislocalization, aggregation, and neurotoxicity in ALS SOD1 Oxidative Stress and Mitochondrial Dysfunction Mutations lead to oxidative stress, protein misfolding, and mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS FUS Nucleocytoplasmic Transport and Aggregation Mutations disrupt RNA metabolism, protein mislocalization, and aggregation To elucidate the functions of FUS, research has concentrated on the role of the cabeza (caz) gene, which is the sole ortholog of FUS in Drosophila [77]. The caz1 mutants were found to be morphologically normal but exhibited a defect in adult eclosion. The resulting adult escapers demonstrated a reduced lifespan and impaired locomotion [78]. Overex- Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 9 of 21 pression of FUS in the nervous system of caz1 mutants in Drosophila was able to rescue the eclosion defect and restore both lifespan and locomotor function. However, the expres- sion of mutated forms of FUS (P525L and R522G) affected the survival of caz1 mutants to adulthood without influencing lifespan or locomotion in adults [78]. RNA interference (RNAi) lines used to knock down caz gene expression in neurons showed that caz silencing did not impact lifespan but did impair climbing performance [79]. Knockdown of caz in the eye led to a rough eye phenotype resulting from apoptotic cells in the pupal retina; this phenotype could be rescued by the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein p35 [80]. The generation of new caz null mutants and conditional alleles using ho- mologous recombination confirmed the previously observed phenotypes of pupal lethality and locomotor defects [81]. These findings support the essential role of caz in neural devel- opment and provide evidence in favor of the loss-of-function (LOF) hypothesis to explain FUS-induced neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Gain-of-function (GOF) of caz resulted in phenotypes similar to those observed with FUS overexpression, including impaired larval locomotion, reduced synaptic bouton number, and severe eye degeneration [82]. Additionally, both caz and FUS GOF induced apoptosis when expressed in motorneurons [79]. These findings further support (i) the concept of evolutionary conservation between caz and FUS and (ii) the pivotal role of FUS expression levels in triggering the neurodegener- ative process [78,83,84]. Therefore, a deeper understanding of the physiological functions of FUS and its various interacting partners is crucial for elucidating the mechanisms involved in this pathology. 5. Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis 5.1. Symptoms: Initial Signs and Progression of ALS Symptoms ALS presents with a diverse range of clinical features. The key characteristic is the coexistence of upper and lower motor neuron signs and symptoms. Upper motor neuron (UMN) findings include hyperreflexia, poor dexterity, incoordination, and spasticity. Com- mon bulbar UMN findings are dysarthria and dysphagia. Lower motor neuron (LMN) findings include muscle atrophy and fasciculations [85]. Weakness, a central feature, can result from dysfunction in either upper or lower motor neurons. The initial presentation influences the pattern of symptom progression and has prognostic significance. Most patients initially present with asymmetric LMN symptoms localized to the arm or leg [86]. Common early clinical signs include hand weakness, shoulder girdle weakness, and foot drop. Bulbar-onset ALS, which occurs in 25% of patients, typically presents with dysarthria and dysphagia. A minority of patients initially present with respiratory muscle weakness or generalized weakness combined with bulbar muscle weakness [87]. In patients who develop cognitive symptoms, impaired word fluency is an early finding. Other features of executive dysfunction, such as mental inflexibility, inattention, disinhibition, or difficulty in planning or problem-solving, can emerge as the disease progresses [88]. Impairment in multiple cognitive domains is less common in ALS and, when present, usually involves language or memory and may be confounded by co- pathologies such as Alzheimer’s disease [89]. Behavioral abnormalities are a frequent neuropsychiatric feature in ALS, with apathy being the most common. Other behavioral changes include disinhibition, perseverative behavior, altered food preferences, loss of empathy, and impaired social cognition, including emotional processing [90,91]. Pathological crying and laughing, also known as emotional lability or pseudobulbar affect, is present in approximately one-third of patients with ALS and is associated with gray and white matter pathology in the cortico-cerebellar network. Pathological crying and laughing do not correlate with neuropsychological measures and should be distinguished from other cognitive and behavioral symptoms [92–94]. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 10 of 21 5.2. Diagnostic Criteria: Revised El Escorial Criteria and Other Diagnostic Tools Diagnosing ALS is based on the El Escorial criteria. According to these criteria, diagnosis requires a history of progressive weakness spreading within a region or to other regions, such as the bulbar region (affecting speech and swallowing), cervical region (affecting the upper limbs), thoracic region (affecting the chest wall and abdominal muscles), or lumbar region (affecting the lower limbs). There must be evidence of lower motor neuron involvement (indicated by specific symptoms or denervation on electromyography) and upper motor neuron involvement (indicated by specific symptoms and brisk deep tendon reflexes) [95]. The development of the Awaji criteria, which stemmed from a revised algorithm for the clinical neurophysiological assessment in diagnosing ALS, formulated through a consensus among experts and grounded in the existing literature, has been criticized for potentially possessing several limitations [96]. The Awaji criteria proposed that neurophysiological indicators of lower motor neuron (LMN) dysfunction should be considered equivalent to clinical signs of LMN involve- ment, while the assessment of upper motor neuron (UMN) dysfunction remained reliant on clinical evaluation. Compared to the revised El Escorial criteria (rEEC), the Awaji criteria demonstrated increased sensitivity in several studies [97,98]. However, some stud- ies reported lower sensitivities [99,100], a discrepancy attributed to the exclusion of the probable-laboratory-supported diagnostic category. Notably, the diagnostic advantage of the Awaji criteria was found to be most significant in cases of bulbar-onset ALS [96]. The use of the Awaji algorithm eliminates the somewhat artificial distinction between clinically definite ALS and EMG definite ALS, as it integrates the clinical and electrophysi- ological diagnostic processes, treating them as complementary rather than independent assessments [98]. In September 2019, an assembly of international neurologists convened in Gold Coast, Australia, with the objective of deconstructing and simplifying the diagnostic process for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The resulting Gold Coast criteria for ALS diagnosis require evidence of progressive motor impairment, which must be documented through patient history or repeated clinical assessments, following an initial period of normal motor function. Additionally, there must be evidence of both upper and lower motor neuron dysfunction within at least one body region. If dysfunction is confined to a single region, both upper and lower motor neuron impairments must be present in that region. In cases involving multiple regions, lower motor neuron dysfunction must be evident in at least two regions. Furthermore, the exclusion of other disease processes must be achieved through appropriate investigations tailored to the clinical presentation [101]. The criteria specify that upper motor neuron dysfunction is characterized by at least one of the following: increased deep tendon reflexes, the presence of pathological reflexes (such as the Hoffman or Babinski signs), increased muscle tone (spasticity), or slowed and poorly coordinated voluntary movements not attributable to lower motor neuron weakness or Parkinsonian features. In contrast, lower motor neuron dysfunction requires either clinical evidence of muscle weakness and wasting or electromyography (EMG) abnormalities. These EMG findings must indicate chronic neurogenic changes, such as large motor unit potentials, and evidence of ongoing denervation, which may manifest as fibrillation potentials or positive sharp waves [102]. The body regions relevant to the diagnosis are defined as bulbar, cervical, thoracic, and lumbosacral. A region is classified as involved if there are abnormalities in two limb muscles innervated by different roots and nerves or if there are abnormalities in a single bulbar or thoracic muscle. Appropriate diagnostic investigations may include nerve conduction studies, needle EMG, imaging techniques (such as magnetic resonance imaging), biofluid analysis, or other modalities deemed clinically necessary [101]. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) diagnosis is classified into four categories based on specific criteria. Definite ALS is identified by the presence of upper motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN) signs in three anatomical regions. Probable ALS is Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 11 of 21 diagnosed when UMN and LMN signs are present in at least two regions, with UMN signs rostral to LMN signs. Probable ALS, laboratory-supported, involves the presence of UMN and LMN signs in one region with electromyographic (EMG) evidence of LMN involvement in another region. Lastly, Possible ALS is characterized by the presence of UMN and LMN signs in one region or UMN signs in two or three regions, which may include conditions such as monomelic ALS, progressive bulbar palsy, and primary lateral sclerosis. There is an average delay of 10–16 months from the onset of a patient’s symptoms to the confirmation of the diagnosis. The absence of a definitive biological marker for ALS, the highly variable initial clinical presentations of the disease, and its pathogenic overlap with several neurodegenerative disorders all contribute to the difficulty in diagnosing ALS with acceptable certainty [103]. Moreover, we should also take into account the importance of ALS staging. Two of the most important staging systems are represented by MiTo and King’s [104,105]. The King’s Clinical Staging System and the Milano-Torino (MiToS) Functional Staging System represent two distinct approaches for assessing the progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The King’s staging system divides ALS into five stages, which are determined by the extent of clinical involvement and its impact on feeding or respiratory function. Stage 1 denotes the onset of symptoms, while Stage 5 corresponds to death. Although the King’s staging is not directly derived from the ALS Functional Rating Scale- Revised (ALSFRS-R), there is a 92% concordance when estimating stages from ALSFRS-R scores. This system is primarily concerned with the anatomical spread of the disease and significant respiratory muscle involvement, providing greater specificity in distinguishing stages during the early to mid-phases of ALS. Conversely, the MiToS staging system comprises six stages, from 0 to 5, based on functional abilities as measured by the ALSFRS-R. Stage 0 reflects normal function, whereas Stage 5 represents death. The MiToS system is specifically designed to evaluate the func- tional capabilities affected by ALS, with a particular focus on the later stages of the disease due to its emphasis on the functional burden. While these two staging systems differ in their approaches, they are complementary rather than redundant, each offering unique perspectives on disease progression. The King’s system provides a more detailed resolution of disease spread in the early to mid- stages, emphasizing clinical and anatomical progression, while the MiToS system offers a more nuanced evaluation of functional impairment in the later stages. Therefore, em- ploying both staging systems together is recommended to achieve a more comprehensive understanding of ALS progression [104,105]. Moreover, recent advancements in neuroimaging, including advanced computational methods and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), have significantly improved the capacity to detect subtle alterations in brain structure and function. These technological devel- opments enable a more detailed characterization of gray and white matter damage in patients, thereby facilitating the distinction between various subtypes of amyotrophic lat- eral sclerosis (ALS) and monitoring disease progression. For instance, novel MRI techniques have demonstrated the potential to differentiate between faster and slower-progressing ALS cases by analyzing patterns of cortical thinning, white matter integrity, and specific neuroanatomical changes associated with distinct clinical phenotypes [106]. 5.3. Differential Diagnosis: Distinguishing ALS from Other Motor Neuron Diseases and Conditions For patients with predominant upper motor neuron (UMN) involvement, conditions such as cervical radiculomyelopathy, hereditary spastic paraplegia, adrenomyeloneuropa- thy, and cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis should be considered. If only lower motor neuron (LMN) features are present, diagnoses like plexopathy, peripheral neuropathy (e.g., mul- tifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, infectious neuropathy), or myopathies (e.g., inclusion body myositis) should be ruled out. Flail arm ALS needs to be distinguished from conditions such as Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 12 of 21 spinal muscular atrophy, Kennedy’s disease, multifocal motor neuropathy, and monomelic amyotrophy. In cases of focal onset neck extensor weakness, myasthenia gravis and fo- cal myopathy should be considered. Muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK) myasthenia can present with tongue weakness and atrophy, potentially being mistaken for bulbar ALS [107]. 6. Current Therapeutic Approaches For many years, Riluzole (6-(trifluoromethoxy)-2-aminobenzothiazole) was the only treatment available for ALS patients. The primary goal of this treatment was to reduce excitotoxicity, particularly from glutamate. The beneficial effects of Riluzole are believed to come from several actions. Firstly, it acts as a sodium channel blocker on presynaptic neurons, which decreases the release of glutamate into the synaptic cleft. Additionally, it increases glutamate reuptake by activating astrocytic excitatory amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT2) channels [108,109]. It also noncompetitively inhibits AMPA and N-methyl-D- aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors on postsynaptic neurons. Finally, Riluzole appears to reduce gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) reuptake and enhance GABA receptors [110]. Edaravone, the newest FDA-approved medication for ALS, acts as a powerful an- tioxidant and free radical scavenger. While its exact mechanism in treating ALS is not completely understood, its antioxidant properties are deemed crucial because oxidative stress significantly contributes to the disease’s progression [111]. Sodium phenylbutyrate/taurursodiol is another approved treatment for ALS, working by mitigating cellular stress pathways and promoting nerve cell survival. Patients taking this medication have shown a slower decline in daily functioning and increased survival rates compared to those on a placebo [112]. Tofersen, an RNA-based therapy, is approved to reduce the production of the super- oxide dismutase type 1 (SOD1) protein by degrading toxic aggregates of SOD1 mRNA (superoxide dismutase type-1 messenger ribonucleic acid). Starting Tofersen treatment has demonstrated reductions in neurofilament-axonal (nerve) injury, decreased neurodegenera- tion, and improved disease outcomes [113,114]. A study identified the combination of nebivolol and donepezil (nebivolol-donepezil) as a potential treatment for ALS by examining genetic information from ALS patients and pharmacogenomic data from the drug. The findings revealed that nebivolol-donepezil significantly reduced cytokine levels in microglial cell lines, inhibited nuclear factor-κB nuclear translocation in HeLa cells, protected against excitotoxicity-induced neuronal loss by modulating the PI3K-Akt pathway, and promoted the differentiation of neural precursor cells into motor neurons [115]. PXT864, a low-dose combination of aminocaproate and baclofen, has shown the ability to protect neuromuscular junctions and maintain motor neuron integrity in glutamatergic- injured primary neuron-muscle models, suggesting it could be a promising therapeutic strategy for ALS [116]. These findings indicate that combination therapies may help slow the progression of ALS, improve patients’ quality of life, and extend their life expectancy, making them highly promising treatment options. Another therapeutic strategy that has gained renewed interest involves targeting muscle abnormalities in ALS. One rationale is neuroprotective, suggesting that changes in muscle and neuromuscular junctions may contribute to retrograde degeneration, as indicated by recent research on the role of muscle-secreted toxic exosomes in motor neuron degeneration [117]. The second approach focuses on symptom relief by increasing muscle contractility. This includes the development of two troponin activators, tirasemtiv [118,119] and reldesemtiv (NCT04944784), aimed at enhancing muscle contractility. Additionally, there are efforts to improve muscle mass and strength [120]. For frontotemporal dementia (FTD) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) associated with the C9orf72 expansion, structural and functional MRI studies indicate that subcortical structures, particularly the thalamus, are more likely to be affected compared to sporadic cases. Patients with FTD resulting from GRN or TBK1 mutations have been reported to Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 13 of 21 exhibit prominently asymmetric atrophy, which is most noticeable in the later stages of the disease. In comparison to sporadic ALS, C9orf72-associated ALS demonstrates more extensive frontotemporal involvement, even in the absence of cognitive or behavioral symptoms. Additionally, many SOD1 variants are linked to more pronounced cervical spinal cord atrophy, with a relative preservation of cortical motor networks [121]. 7. Emerging Therapies and Future Directions 7.1. Gene Therapy: Advances in Gene Editing and Antisense Oligonucleotides Gene therapy for ALS is a promising approach that targets genetic mutations in SOD1, C9ORF72, TARDBP, and FUS. Various strategies have been developed to address these genetic abnormalities, including antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) and RNA interference (RNAi) to degrade or inhibit abnormal mRNA, as well as gene delivery via viral vectors to replace defective genes. For example, ASOs targeting the SOD1 gene have shown effectiveness in reducing toxic protein levels in preclinical studies and have advanced to clinical trials. Tofersen, an ASO against SOD1 mRNA, demonstrated safety and tolerability in phase 1 trials, with phase 3 trials currently underway to confirm its ability to slow disease progression. Similarly, CRISPR/Cas9 technology has been used to correct mutations in genes like FUS, showing potential in preclinical models to restore normal function and reduce disease symptoms. These advancements underscore the significant potential of gene therapy to alter the course of ALS, though further research and clinical trials are needed to ensure long-term efficacy and safety [85,122,123]. 7.2. Stem Cell Therapy: Potential of Stem Cell Treatments in ALS Astrocytes and microglia play essential roles in ALS pathogenesis by promoting neuroinflammation. In the brain and spinal cord, these cells interact with neurons and with each other, influencing disease progression. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) offer a valuable platform for studying ALS, providing insights into disease mechanisms across all genotypes and aiding in modeling sporadic cases. hiPSCs enable the development of high-throughput genetic and chemical screens [124]. Protocols for differentiating hiPSCs into astrocytes have been established for over a decade, while protocols for hiPSC-derived microglia have emerged more recently [125]. These protocols aim to mimic microglial development, distinct from blood macrophages, as microglia originate from yolk sac- derived progenitors [126,127]. Despite their potential, challenges remain in modeling ALS with hiPSCs. Simplified hiPSC-derived monocultures allow the study of cell-autonomous effects, but understanding non-cell-autonomous disease mechanisms requires modeling interactions between neurons and glia. Co-cultures of hiPSC-derived neurons and glia support glial maturation and have been used to study ALS patient-derived cells [128]. More complex in vitro models incorporating multiple cell types would be ideal. For example, ezogabine, a potassium channel activator, reduced neuronal excitability in SOD1 and C9ORF72 hiPSC models, leading to a phase 2 clinical trial that showed decreased motor neuron excitability [129]. Similarly, the src/c-Abl inhibitor bosutinib improved hiPSC-derived motor neuron survival and muscle contractions in ALS models and is currently in clinical trials. Ropinirole, a dopamine agonist, showed positive effects in hiPSC-derived motor neurons from patients with TARDBP, FUS mutations, and sporadic ALS, leading to a phase I/IIa clinical trial [130]. Stem cell therapy holds promise for ALS treatment. hiPSCs allow the study of disease-specific mutations and their effects on neural cells, aiding in understanding ALS pathogenesis and testing therapies. Advances in gene editing, like CRISPR/Cas9, have furthered these studies. Despite challenges in achieving full cell maturation, hiPSC-based models continue to provide valuable insights and hold potential for developing effective ALS treatments. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 14 of 21 8. Biomarkers for Early Detection and Progression: Recent Developments in Biomarker Research 8.1. Neurofilaments Neurofilaments are among the most widely characterized fluid biomarkers in neu- rodegenerative diseases. Found only in neurons, these intermediate, filamentous proteins form part of the cytoskeletal structure and are particularly abundant in myelinated ax- ons [131]. Released into the interstitial fluid during neuroaxonal injury and easily measured in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), neurofilaments especially neurofilament light (NfL) and phos- phorylated neurofilament heavy (pNfH) have become markers of neuronal injury and degeneration. Consequently, neurofilaments in CSF have been extensively studied as diagnostic, prognostic, susceptibility/risk, and response biomarkers for ALS. Studies have shown that CSF and blood neurofilament levels are higher in ALS pa- tients compared to those with ALS mimics, indicating their usefulness in distinguishing between the two groups [132,133]. This evidence suggests that fluid neurofilament concen- trations could lead to a quicker and more accurate ALS diagnosis. However, adding other biomarkers involved in ALS pathophysiology and ALS mimic syndromes may further enhance diagnostic accuracy. 8.2. Chitinase Non-neuronal cells play a role in ALS pathophysiology, with activated microglia and astrocytes causing chitinase expression. According to Thompson et al. [134], chitotriosidase- 1 (CHIT1) and chitinase-3-like protein 2 (CHI3L2/YKL39) could differentiate ALS from mimicking conditions, but their diagnostic performance was weaker than neurofilament. CHIT1 and CHI3L2 were correlated with the rate of disease progression, and CHIT1 was correlated with survival when included in a multivariate model [134]. Another study con- ducted by Gille et al. [135] found that CHIT1 and chitinase-3-like protein 1 (CHI3L1/YKL40) had low discrimination ability and weak correlation with disease progression; however, CHI3L1 was independently associated with survival. A longitudinal study showed that CHIT1 and CHI3L1 were linked to the rate of disease progression and, consistent with pre- vious findings, their levels remained stable over time [136]. These proteins are promising as prognostic and pharmacodynamic biomarkers [137]. 8.3. Niclosamide A recent study by Milani et al. (2024) explored the effects of Niclosamide on the SOD1 gene mutation in two transgenic murine models, SOD1-G93A and FUS mice, with the drug administered intraperitoneally. Niclosamide belongs to the salicylanilide class of pharmacologic agents, characterized by an aryl β-hydroxy-carbonyl pharmacophore motif, commonly found in many biologically active natural products. Its primary action involves the translocation of protons across the mitochondrial membrane, leading to mild mitochondrial uncoupling. This mechanism is potent enough to kill tapeworms in the gastrointestinal tract while remaining generally well-tolerated by human cells. Milani et al. found that in vivo treatment with Niclosamide in 34 male and 20 female mice with the SOD1 gene mutation, initiated at symptom onset and continued for approximately 160 days, and in 32 FUS mice treated for about 40 days, resulted in significant benefits. The probability of survival after treatment increased by 40%, and overall survival improved by approximately 20%. Additionally, Niclosamide delayed the onset of neuromuscular deficits and significantly enhanced muscular strength [138] (). Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 15 of 21 . Role of Chitinase as a Biomarker in ALS Pathophysiology. This image illustrates how activated microglia and astrocytes in ALS contribute to chitinase expression, which serves as a biomarker for disease progression and therapeutic monitoring. 9. Conclusions In summary, this review has provided a detailed overview of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), covering its epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical presentation, diag- nostic methods, and both current and emerging treatments. The key findings highlight the complexity of ALS, with both genetic and environmental factors playing important roles in its development. Advances in understanding molecular mechanisms like protein misfolding, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and axonal transport defects have helped clarify the disease’s progression and potential treatment targets. These findings have significant implications for clinical practice. Improved diagnostic criteria and the identification of biomarkers can lead to earlier and more accurate diagnoses, potentially improving patient outcomes. Current drug treatments offer some benefits but highlight the need for more effective therapies. Emerging treatments, such as gene therapy and stem cell therapy, provide hope for changing the course of the disease and enhancing the quality of life for ALS patients. Looking ahead, continued research is crucial to overcoming current challenges, such as the variability in disease presentation and the limited effectiveness of existing treatments. Further exploration of ALS’s molecular basis and the development of innovative thera- peutic strategies are essential. Policymakers and healthcare providers must also consider these advancements, ensuring that new therapies are accessible to those in need and that healthcare systems support ongoing ALS research and patient care. In conclusion, while there has been significant progress in understanding and treating ALS, much work remains. The future of ALS research holds promise for more effective treatments and, ultimately, a cure for this devastating disease. Collaborative efforts in research, clinical practice, and policy will be vital in making these advancements a reality. Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.E.R., A.D. and A.V.C.; validation, A.D., A.-D.C. and H.P.C.; formal analysis, R.E.R. and H.P.C.; investigation, A.D. and A.-D.C.; resources, R.E.R.; writing—original draft preparation, H.P.C. and A.-D.C.; writing—review and editing, A.-D.C. and A.D.; visualization, H.P.C. and A.V.C.; supervision, A.V.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 9966 16 of 21 Funding: Publication of this paper was supported by the University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, through the institutional program Publish not Perish. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a clinical review P. Masroria,b,c and P. Van Dammea,b,c aDepartment of Neurosciences, Experimental Neurology, KU Leuven – University of Leuven, Leuven; bLaboratory of Neurobiology, Center for Brain and Disease Research, VIB, Leuven; and cDepartment of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Keywords: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, sporadic and familial ALS, TDP-43 pathology Received 30 November 2019 Accepted 4 June 2020 European Journal of Neurology 2020, 27: 1918– 1929 doi:10.1111/ene.14393 Abstract Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder aﬀecting primarily the motor system, but in which extra-motor manifestations are increasingly recognized. The loss of upper and lower motor neurons in the motor cortex, the brain stem nuclei and the anterior horn of the spinal cord gives rise to progressive muscle weakness and wasting. ALS often has a focal onset but subsequently spreads to diﬀerent body regions, where failure of res- piratory muscles typically limits survival to 2–5 years after disease onset. In up to 50% of cases, there are extra-motor manifestations such as changes in behaviour, executive dysfunction and language problems. In 10%–15% of patients, these problems are severe enough to meet the clinical criteria of fron- totemporal dementia (FTD). In 10% of ALS patients, the family history sug- gests an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The remaining 90% have no aﬀected family members and are classiﬁed as sporadic ALS. The causes of ALS appear to be heterogeneous and are only partially understood. To date, more than 20 genes have been associated with ALS. The most common genetic cause is a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9orf72 gene, responsible for 30%–50% of familial ALS and 7% of sporadic ALS. These expansions are also a frequent cause of frontotemporal dementia, emphasizing the molecular overlap between ALS and FTD. To this day there is no cure or eﬀective treatment for ALS and the cornerstone of treatment remains multi- disciplinary care, including nutritional and respiratory support and symptom management. In this review, diﬀerent aspects of ALS are discussed, including epidemiology, aetiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, diﬀerential diagnosis, investigations, treatment and future prospects. Introduction Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) was originally deﬁned as a pure motor neuron disease by Jean- Martin Charcot in 1869 but is now recognized as a multisystem neurodegenerative disorder, with disease heterogeneity at the clinical, genetic and neuropatho- logical level [1–3]. The clinical presentation of ALS typically consists of adult onset focal muscle weakness and wasting, which has a tendency to spread with disease progression. The weakness most commonly starts in the limb muscles, more often in distal muscles than in proximal muscles. In about 25%–30% of cases there is a bulbar onset of the disease, presenting with dysar- thria, dysphagia, dysphonia, or more rarely with mas- seter weakness. There is a high degree of variability in the age at onset, the site of onset and the disease progression rate of ALS. The disease is relentlessly progressive in most patients, with a median survival of about 3 years after symptom onset, where death is mostly attributed to respiratory failure. About 50% of patients will suﬀer from extra-motor manifestations to some degree in addition to their motor problems. In 10%–15% of cases, an additional diagnosis of fron- totemporal dementia (FTD) can be made [4], whilst Correspondence: P. Van Damme, Neurology Department, University Hospitals Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium (tel.: +32344280; fax: +3216344285; e-mail: philip.vandamme@uzleuven.be). © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology 1918 This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes. R E V I E W E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F N E U R O L O G Y 35%–40% of patients will have mild behavioural and/ or cognitive changes. FTD is characterized by the degeneration of frontal and anterior temporal lobes and presents clinically by behavioural changes, impair- ment of executive functioning and/or language impair- ment [5]. ALS and FTD are now considered to be two ends of a spectrum due to the overlap in molecu- lar mechanisms underlying both neurodegenerative disorders [6]. At the genetic level there is considerable disease heterogeneity as well, with more than 20 genes that have been associated with ALS. The ﬁve most com- mon genetic causes are hexanucleotide expansions in chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) and mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TARDBP), fused in sar- coma (FUS) and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). Together, they explain about 15% of all patients [1–3]. The most common neuropathological signature of ALS is cytoplasmic aggregation of TDP-43, a protein encoded by TARDBP, which is found in more than 95% of ALS cases [7]. TDP-43 inclusions are not unique to patients with mutations in TARDBP, but are also present in patients with C9orf72 expansions or with TBK1 mutations and in patients with sporadic ALS (sALS). TDP-43 is predominantly localized to the nucleus under basal conditions, but in ALS it mis- localizes to the cytoplasm to form aggregates and become phosphorylated. Other aggregating proteins, such as SOD1 and FUS, are found in patients bearing SOD1 and FUS mutations, respectively. Patients with C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions have accu- mulations of dipeptide repeat proteins which are translated from the GGGGCC repeats, although this repeat is located in a non-coding region of the gene. The diagnosis of ALS remains a clinical diagnosis and is based on the presence of both upper motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN) signs, in patients with progressive muscle weakness in whom no alternative explanation can be found. Most clinicians do not rely on the available revised El Esco- rial criteria [8] or the Awaji algorithm [9], as these cri- teria lack sensitivity, rather capturing disease progression and only indirectly diagnostic certainty [10]. Moreover, these criteria have been developed for research purposes to select patients for participation in clinical trials. There is a high need for clinical diag- nostic criteria of ALS and related subtypes of motor neuron disease, to reduce the diagnostic delay, which is unfortunately still often up to a year after disease onset. Recently, new simpliﬁed diagnostic criteria for ALS have been proposed, requiring only combined UMN and LMN dysfunction in one body region, or LMN dysfunction in at least two regions [11]. Whether this will reduce the diagnostic delay requires further study. The only European Medicines Agency approved drug to treat ALS is riluzole, a glutamate antagonist, which has a small but signiﬁcant eﬀect on survival in ALS [12]. Despite the ever-growing knowledge about the causes and disease mechanisms underlying ALS, more than 40 randomized clinical trials have been negative [13]. There are many potential reasons for this lack of success, but treating ALS as one disease regardless of the underlying cause or disease mecha- nisms involved may be one of them. Epidemiology Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis has an estimated inci- dence of 1.75–3 per 100 000 persons per year and a prevalence of 10–12 per 100 000 in Europe, but signif- icant geographical diﬀerences exist [14–16]. The inci- dence amounts to 4–8 per 100 000 persons per year in the age group with the highest risk of developing ALS (45–75 years). Mean age at onset of symptoms is vari- able: 58–63 years for sALS and 40–60 years for famil- ial ALS (fALS) [14]. An estimation of the cumulative lifetime risk for developing ALS is 1:350 in men and 1:400 in women [17,18]. Men have a higher risk of developing sporadic limb onset ALS compared to women; the global sex ratio is 1.2–1.5 [19]. Aetiology Similar to other neurodegenerative conditions, ALS is thought to be caused by a combination of genetic fac- tors, environmental factors and aging-related dysfunc- tion. At the genetic level, more than 20 genes have been linked with the disease to date, and it is antici- pated that more genetic factors will be discovered. The genetic architecture of ALS appears complex, where monogenetic mutations with high eﬀect size currently explain about 15% of patients, but where common and rare genetic variants with low and mod- erate eﬀect size seem to contribute to the risk of developing ALS as well. The overall heritability of ALS is high; in patients with sALS the heritability is estimated to be 30%–60% [18,20]. The risk of devel- oping ALS doubles in ﬁrst degree relatives of ALS patients [20]. Autosomal dominant causes of ALS In 1993, the ﬁrst ALS-related gene was discovered: SOD1, responsible for 20% of fALS and 1%–2% of sALS [21]. Mutations in this gene do not cause ALS © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology ALS: A CLINICAL REVIEW 1919 by loss of SOD1 function but rather by rendering the protein prone to aggregation, which disturbs multiple important cellular functions. In 2008 and 2009, mutations in TARDBP and FUS, the genes encoding the RNA-binding proteins TDP-43 and FUS, were discovered. These mutations are responsible for 3%–5% of fALS and for <1% of sALS [22–25]. In 2011, C9orf72 was discovered, responsible for 30%–50% of fALS and for 7%–10% of sALS [26,27]. Patients with hexanucleotide repeat expansions in C9orf72 are more likely to get bulbar onset ALS and to have cognitive and behavioural impairment as well. Mutations in TBK1 are most probably the ﬁfth most common cause of autosomal dominant ALS, responsible for about 1% of patients [28,29] but up to 10% of patients with ALS-FTD [30]. Although most SOD1 mutations have a high pene- trance, the other genes mentioned are known to have a reduced penetrance, which complicates genetic coun- selling. Rarely, patients carry mutations in more than one of these genes, suggesting that ALS can be oli- gogenic in origin [31]. Using next-generation sequencing, several rare vari- ants in additional genes have been identiﬁed [1–3]. Whilst mutations in many of these genes are rarely identiﬁed as the cause of ALS, they appear to cluster in some emerging disease pathways (Fig. 1). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis risk factors Only few genetic risk factors for ALS have been iden- tiﬁed. An at risk genotype is UNC13A [32], and inter- mediate repeat expansions in ATXN2 increase the risk of getting ALS [33,34]. Apart from genetic factors, age and male sex increase the risk for ALS. Several studies have sug- gested environmental risk factors for ALS, such as Clustering of ALS genes in pathogenic pathways. (1) Mutations in TBK-1, OPTN, SQSTM1 (= p62), UBQLN2, C9orf72 and VCP aﬀect the protein degradation pathways and may contribute to TDP-43 accumulation. (2) Mutations in TARDBP, FUS, MATR3, TIA1, hnRNPA1, hnRNA2B1 and ATXN2 may all aﬀect RNA metabolism. (3) Mutations in TUBA4A, PFN1, KIF5A and DCTN1 alter cytoskeletal dynamics and axonal transport. © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology 1920 MASRORI AND VAN DAMME smoking, body mass index, physical exercise, occupa- tional and environmental exposures to metals, pesti- cides, b-methylamino-L-alanine, head injury and viral infections [35–37]. However, the causal relationship of these factors with ALS remains to be established. Pathogenesis The neuropathological signature of ALS is character- ized by loss of the neuromuscular connection, axonal retraction and subsequent cell death of UMNs and LMNs, surrounded by astrogliosis and microgliosis, with ubiquitin-positive inclusions being observed in sur- viving neurons. TDP-43 is the main component of these inclusions in more than 95% of ALS patients [7]. TDP- 43 is an RNA- and DNA-binding protein involved in multiple processes such as transcription, splicing, micro RNA maturation, RNA transport and stress granule formation. In line with its nuclear and cytoplasmic functions, TDP-43 can shuttle between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, but its localization is mainly nuclear. Mislocalization to the cytoplasm, leading to nuclear depletion of TDP-43 along with cytoplasmic protein aggregation, is a hallmark of ALS [38]. Multiple molecular pathways have been implicated in the pathogenesis of ALS, such as failure of proteostasis, excitotoxicity, neuroinﬂammation, mitochondrial dys- function and oxidative stress, oligodendrocyte dysfunc- tion, cytoskeletal disturbances and axonal transport defects, disturbed RNA metabolism, nucleocytoplasmic transport deﬁcits and impaired DNA repair [2,39]. Interestingly, many of the genes associated with ALS appear to cluster in key pathways: protein quality con- trol and degradation, RNA metabolism, and cytoskele- tal and axonal transport (Fig. 1). Failure of proteostasis Protein aggregates or, more likely, their oligomeric complex precursors disturb normal protein homeosta- sis and induce cellular stress. Molecular chaperones can aid in refolding misfolded proteins, but when the cell is overloaded with misfolded proteins they will be targeted for degradation after ubiquitination via the ubiquitin–proteasome system. Alternatively, protein aggregates can also undergo lysosomal degradation by the autophagy pathway after binding to p62 (se- questosome 1). Multiple ALS-related genes support an important role for protein aggregation and impaired degradation as key factors in ALS pathogenesis. Indeed, ubiquilin-2 (UBQLN2) has a role in the delivery of ubiquitinated proteins to the proteasome [40]. Several other muta- tions are found in genes involved in cargo recognition for the autophagy pathway, as they encode proteins that interact with the ubiquitinated cargo and the pha- gophore membrane: SQSTM1 (encoding the protein p62, which targets ubiquitinated proteins to the phagophore) [41], optineurin (OPTN, functioning as a receptor for autophagy) [42], TBK1 (activates OPTN by phosphorylation) [29], valosin-containing protein (VCP) [43] and the C9orf72 protein [44]. Disturbed RNA metabolism A remarkable number of RNA-binding proteins are involved in the pathogenesis of ALS. Identiﬁcation of mutations in the genes of two related RNA-binding pro- teins TDP-43 and FUS has introduced the mechanism of dysregulation of RNA metabolism to ALS [45]. Additional mutations in other RNA-binding proteins such as angiogenin (ANG), senataxin (STX), matrin-3 (MATR3), heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins A1 (hnRNPA1) and A2B1 (hnRNPA2B1), and ataxin-2 (ATXN2) further support the notion that disrupted RNA metabolism probably plays an important role in ALS [46]. Under normal conditions, these proteins reside predominantly in the nucleus, where they serve impor- tant functions in transcription, splicing, non-coding RNA metabolism and micro RNA biogenesis. Hence, nuclear depletion can be detrimental and induce gross transcriptome abnormalities. Mislocalization to the cytoplasm with aggregation may induce toxicity as well. Cytoskeletal disturbances and axonal transport defects Several genetic factors in ALS point toward the importance of cytoskeletal integrity and axonal trans- port [47]: proﬁlin-1 (PFN1) and tubulin alpha-4A (TUBA4A) mutations only rarely cause ALS but were found to destabilize the tubulin network and cause axonal transport deﬁcits. The dynactin complex is an important activator of the dynein motor that stabilizes the binding of cargoes and modulates motor function. Point mutations in the gene encoding the dynactin1 (DCTN1) subunit of the dynactin complex may cause ALS or FTD [48,49]. Mutations in the C-terminus of kinesin-1, encoded by kinesin heavy chain isoform 5A (KIF5A), may impair the anterograde transport of cargoes along the microtubules [50,51]. Clinical features Clinical presentation The hallmark of ALS is progressive muscle weakness, accompanied by muscle atrophy, fasciculations, © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology ALS: A CLINICAL REVIEW 1921 muscle cramps and slowness of movements with mus- cle stiﬀness. The onset of muscle weakness in ALS is usually focal and typically spreads to adjacent body regions. This pattern is compatible with spreading of disease pathology within the motor system, with neu- roanatomic propagation within the spinal cord seg- ments and the motor cortex [52]. The disease usually presents with unilateral distal muscle weakness and atrophy in upper or lower limb muscles (spinal ALS, roughly in two-thirds of patients) or in bulbar muscles (bulbar ALS, in about one-third of patients). Upper limb onset is most com- monly in the dominant hand [53], with thenar muscles being more aﬀected than hypothenar muscles (which is referred to as the split-hand syndrome) [54], with early involvement of the ﬁrst interosseous muscle and ﬁnger extensors more aﬀected than ﬁnger ﬂexors [55]. In the lower limb the anterior tibial muscle is typically aﬀected earlier in the disease course than the gastroc- nemius muscle, the hamstrings before the quadriceps muscles [56]. Bulbar onset ALS presents most commonly with dysarthria or dysphagia, less commonly with dyspho- nia, or reduced mouth closure or chewing problems. Axial muscle weakness with head drop and problems with posture are common in later stages of the dis- ease, but rarely can be the presenting symptom. In about one-third of patients, there can be bouts of uncontrolled laughing or crying (referred to as a pseu- dobulbar aﬀect) [57]. In some patients, the muscle weakness is preceded by a period in which fasciculations, muscle cramps or mild weight loss has been noted. On neurological examination, a combination of signs of UMN and LMN involvement is found in patients with classic ALS. Signs of LMN involvement include muscle weakness, atrophy, fasciculations and reduced muscle tone. Signs of UMN involvement to look for include hyperreﬂexia (or retained reﬂexes in atrophic muscles), increased muscle tone (especially in upper limb ﬂexors and lower limb extensors) and slowness of movements (e.g. of tongue movement). Although the majority of patients can be labelled as having a classic ALS phenotype with spinal or bulbar onset, it is increasingly recognized that ALS is clini- cally a heterogeneous syndrome with distinct motor and extra-motor manifestations (Fig. 2). There is con- siderable heterogeneity within the motor manifesta- tions of the disease itself and the motor manifestations can be accompanied by variable degrees of frontotemporal involvement. This results in diﬀerent phenotypic presentations of the disease which have diﬀerent disease trajectories. Although no widely accepted clinical criteria for the diﬀerent ALS phenotypes exist, there is a growing need for a new classiﬁcation system using universally accepted terms to account for the disease heterogeneity in ALS [58]. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis phenotypes Many diﬀerent motor phenotypes of ALS exist and they are mainly classiﬁed based on the relative UMN versus LMN involvement and the regional distribution of involvement (Fig. 2) [3,58]. It is important to rec- ognize the diﬀerent motor phenotypes, as life expec- tancy varies considerably between subtypes of ALS [59]. In addition, variable degrees of cognitive and behavioural impairment can be present. Subtypes of ALS based on relative UMN versus LMN involvement In classic ALS, signs of combined UMN and LMN loss are present in one or more body regions and most patients presenting with a motor neuron disease can be labelled as classic ALS. Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is characterized by progressive spasticity and slowing of movements with isolated UMN signs on clinical examination. There should be no muscle atrophy or visible fasciculations, and no signs of denervation on electromyography (EMG) 4 years from symptom onset [60]. Most com- monly, the symptoms begin symmetrically in the lower limbs but can begin in the bulbar region as well. PLS represents 3%–5% of all motor neuron diseases. PLS can evolve into ALS, typically within 3–4 years after disease onset. The median survival of PLS patients is more than 20 years. Patients with UMN predominant ALS display some features of LMN involvement but much less pronounced than the UMN features. They have a shorter survival compared to PLS, but a slower disease progression compared to classic ALS. Lower motor neuron predominant ALS patients have very limited UMN signs and can have diﬀerent rates of progression. Progressive muscular atrophy is characterized by progressive isolated LMN signs with- out clinical evidence of UMN dysfunction, although up to 30% of progressive muscular atrophy patients will develop UMN signs during follow-up. Subtypes of motor neuron disease based on regional distribution of involvement Bulbar ALS is a devastating variant of ALS, charac- terized by a rapid decline and a median survival of 2 years from disease onset. Bulbar UMN dysfunction results in spastic dysarthria, which is characterized by slow, laboured and distorted speech. Bulbar LMN © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology 1922 MASRORI AND VAN DAMME dysfunction is characterized by tongue wasting and fasciculation, accompanied by ﬂaccid dysarthria and dysphagia. Whilst only approximately 30% of patients present with bulbar symptoms, the majority of ALS cases eventually suﬀer from speech and swallowing diﬃculties. Pseudobulbar palsy is characterized by absent facial expressions (expressionless face), spastic dysarthria, and diﬃculty in chewing, dysphagia and tongue pro- trusion due to spasticity, but no tongue fasciculation or wasting [61]. As this concerns UMN involvement, the jaw jerk is exaggerated or clonic. This disorder should be diﬀerentiated from progressive bulbar palsy, where the LMNs are aﬀected, although there is no consensus on this syndrome in the literature. Mill’s syndrome (hemiplegic variant) describes a hemiplegic or asymmetrical pattern of involvement. The symptoms are gradually progressive, and the pro- gression is frequently more ascending than descending; the palsy can also involve the facial muscles. Pyrami- dal signs are usually predominant at the side of hemi- plegia. About 3% of patients present with diaphragm weakness (e.g. dyspnoea at exertion, dyspnoea at rest or orthopnoea) as the initial problem (respiratory ALS). The patients with respiratory onset have a poor prognosis. In axial variant ALS, the disease starts in paravertebral muscles, with stooped posture as a pre- senting symptom. Flail arm ALS (brachial amyotrophic diplegia, man-in-the-barrel syndrome or Vulpian–Bernhardt syndrome) is a progressive predominantly LMN pat- tern of weakness in the upper limbs, a mostly sym- metrical pattern of weakness that typically begins in proximal muscles with progression to distal involve- ment. Bulbar symptoms develop in up to 77%. There is a high male preponderance (male to female ratio 3:1) [62]. Flail leg ALS is a progressive, asym- metrical, predominantly LMN pattern of weakness with distal-onset weakness and wasting of the lower limbs. There is no signiﬁcant weakness or wasting in the upper limbs and bulbar region within 12 months after onset, and progression is slightly slower compared to classic ALS. Pseudopolyneuritic ALS is characterized by distal weakness of the lower limbs and absence of Achilles tendon reﬂex, and should be distinguished from peripheral neu- ropathy. Phenotypic presentations of ALS. Motor features of ALS vary in regional distribution and relative UMN versus LMN involvement. Cognitive and behavioural features are detectable in up to 50% of patients. © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology ALS: A CLINICAL REVIEW 1923 Subtypes of ALS based on additional frontotemporal involvement After Alzheimer’s disease, FTD is the most common cause of dementia in patients <65 years of age. In about 50% of ALS patients, the degenerative process can extend to the frontal and anterior temporal lobes, giving rise to a variable degree of executive dysfunction, lan- guage impairments or behavioural changes (Fig. 2). If not speciﬁcally sought for, these changes can go unno- ticed. The Edinburgh cognitive and behavioural ALS screen is a useful screening assay to identify frontotempo- ral dysfunction [63]. About 50% of patients will have normal cognition but in about 10%–15% of patients a diagnosis of ALS-FTD can be made, when the criteria for behavioural variant FTD or criteria for primary pro- gressive aphasia are fulﬁlled (). ALS-behavioural impairment only requires two of six criteria for beha- vioural variant FTD. ALS without cognitive or beha- vioural impairment is associated with dysfunction in two non-executive domains (memory or visuospatial func- tions), whilst ALS-cognitive impairment is associated with impairment on two tests for executive function [64]. Prediction of prognosis Life expectancy in ALS is extremely variable. Many dif- ferent clinical features, already present at ﬁrst disease pre- sentation, are known to be associated with a shorter survival. They include a bulbar onset, a short diagnostic delay, a fast functional decline [e.g. as measured by the revised ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS-R) decline], a pronounced loss of weight (or body mass index), the presence of FTD, an older age at the onset of symptoms and a low forced vital capacity. Moreover, genetic factors also inﬂuence survival. Some monogenetic causes are associated with a shorter survival (Ala5Val mutation in SOD1, C9orf72 repeat expansion, P525L mutation in FUS), but common and rare variants with eﬀects on survival have been described as well. For exam- ple, homozygosity for the C allele of rs12608932 in UNC13a is associated with a shorter survival [65]. The ﬁrst personalized prediction models have been developed which can estimate the survival outcome in individual patients based on a combination of clinical parameters [66]. Such tools are valuable for patient selection or stratiﬁcation in clinical trials and may become important for personalized risk estimation and planning of care. Important differential diagnoses The diagnosis of ALS in patients with a typical disease presentation is relatively straightforward and is based on the recognition of signs of UMN and LMN degenera- tion, in the presence of a progressively worsening spread of symptoms or signs within a region or to other regions (Fig. 2). However, in patients with very early disease pre- sentations, with slow disease progression or with concur- rent central or peripheral nervous system disorders, the diagnosis can be challenging. The probability of misdiag- nosis, the so-called ‘ALS mimicking syndromes’, is about 7%–8% [67]. The ALS mimicking syndromes should be ruled out as delay in treatment may have an unfavour- able eﬀect on outcome. For patients with predominant UMN or LMN involvement, the diﬀerential diagnosis becomes broader. In patients with predominant UMN involve- ment, a cervical radiculomyelopathy, hereditary spas- tic paraplegia, adrenomyeloneuropathy and cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis should be considered. In the case of pure LMN features, the diagnosis of plexopathy, peripheral neuropathy (e.g. multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block, chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, infec- tious neuropathy) or myopathies (e.g. inclusion body myositis) should be ruled out. Flail arm ALS should to be distinguished from mimics such as spinal muscu- lar atrophy, Kennedy’s disease, multifocal motor neu- ropathy and monomelic amyotrophy. In the case of focal onset of neck extensor weakness, myasthenia gravis and focal myopathy should be considered. Muscle-speciﬁc tyrosine kinase (MuSK) myasthenia can be accompanied by tongue weakness and atrophy and be mistaken for bulbar ALS [68]. Investigations The diagnosis of ALS relies on the medical history, physical examination, electrodiagnostic testing (with needle EMG) and neuroimaging. EMG remains a very useful diagnostic tool to conﬁrm LMN involvement in clinically aﬀected and non-aﬀected muscles (with ﬁb- rillation potentials, sharp waves, fasciculation poten- tials in relaxed muscles and chronic neurogenic changes upon contraction) [8,69]. Biomarkers can play a crucial role in diagnostic, prognostic or predictive research studies. They could potentially become important for stratiﬁcation of patients and monitoring treatment eﬀects in clinical trials. Although not yet integrated into standard clini- cal practice, several biomarkers such as cerebrospinal ﬂuid neuroﬁlament levels (especially phosphorylated neuroﬁlament heavy subunit) are useful in supporting the diagnosis [70–72], particularly in patients with very recent onset of muscle weakness, without clear signs of UMN involvement, or with concomitant neu- ropathy/plexopathy/cervical myelopathy. © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology 1924 MASRORI AND VAN DAMME Brain and spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging are often performed to exclude structural lesions aﬀecting the motor system [73]. Furthermore, 18F-ﬂu- orodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomog- raphy, if readily available, can reveal a typical pattern of hypometabolism in Rolandic brain regions and frontotemporal involvement [74,75]. Genetic testing of the ﬁve most prevalent genes found to be mutated in ALS is routinely oﬀered to patients with a positive family history (C9orf72, SOD1, TDP-43, FUS, TBK-1). Although there is no consensus on genetic testing for patients with sALS, there is a trend to oﬀer it to all patients [76,77]. However, genetic testing should only be performed if genetic counselling can be provided in the event that a pathogenic gene mutation is identiﬁed. Gene panels also including rarer ALS- related genes are emerging, but the diagnostic yield on top of the ﬁve most prevalently mutated genes remains low. Criteria for FTD Disorder Variants Clinical diagnosis Imaging (18F FDG PET/ CT of the brain) Primary progressive aphasia (PPA) Non-ﬂuent agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia (naPPA) At least one: • agrammatism errors and omissions, as well as sampliﬁcation f grammatical forms • prosody (the rhythm or melody of speech), as well as speech sound errors (such as motor- based speech planning errors ‘apraxia of speech’) • at least two of the following criteria must be fulﬁlled:– 1) impaired comprehension of complex sentences 2) spared single-word comprehension 3) spared object knowledge Atrophy of anterior perisylvian atrophy involving inferior, opercular and insular portions of the left frontal lobe Semantic variant of primary progressive aphasia (svPPA) • Impaired confrontation naming • Impaired comprehension of single words • At least three of the following criteria must be fulﬁlled: 1) degraded object knowledge 2) surface dyslexia or dysgraphia, in which sight vocabulary words are pronounced as written 3) spared repetition 4) spared speech production Atrophy of left anterior temporal atrophy aﬀecting lateral and ventral surfaces as well as the anterior hippocampus and the amygdala Logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia (lv-PPA) • Profound diﬃculty in word ﬁnding • Impaired repetition of phrases, partly as a result of limited auditory– verbal short-term memory • At least three of the following criteria must be fulﬁlled: 1) speech (phonologic) errors in spontaneous speech and naming 2) spared single-word comprehension and object knowledge 3) spared motor speech 4) absence of frank agrammatism Atrophy of left posterior perisylvian or parietal lobe Behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) At least three:• behavioural disinhibition • apathy or inertia • loss of sympathy or empathy • stereotypical, perseverative or compulsive behaviour • hyperorality or dietary changes • executive deﬁcits with relative sparing of visuospatial skills and memory Prefrontal or anterior temporal cortex loss, particularly in the right hemisphere FTD, frontotemporal dementia; 18F FDG PET/CT, 18F-ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography. © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology ALS: A CLINICAL REVIEW 1925 Treatment/management Over the last decades, more than 40 randomized con- trolled trials in patients with ALS failed to show a beneﬁcial eﬀect on disease progression or on survival, illustrating the complexity of the disease [13]. In most European countries, riluzole remains the only approved disease-modifying drug. Riluzole 50 mg twice daily has antiglutamatergic eﬀects and prolongs the mean patient survival by 3–6 months [12,78,79]. The most common side eﬀects include nausea, diar- rhoea, fatigue, dizziness and liver problems. More recently, the free radical scavenger edaravone has been studied in ALS. A phase III randomized double-blind study of intravenous edaravone 60 mg/ day for 2 weeks per month in selected ALS patients showed a signiﬁcantly smaller decline of the scores on the ALSFRS-R after 6 months of treatment [80]. The study has been criticized because of the small study size, the short study duration, the selection of patients and the lack of data on survival [81]. To date, edar- avone has been approved for the treatment of ALS in the USA, Canada, Japan, South Korea and Switzer- land, but not in the European Union. Another therapy under investigation is masitinib, an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor. A randomized con- trolled trial using 4.5 mg/kg/day of masitinib as an add-on therapy to riluzole suggested a positive eﬀect on the decline of ALSFRS-R, at least in patients with a typical disease progression [82], an eﬀect that will be further explored in a conﬁrmatory study. The cornerstone of disease management for ALS patients remains multidisciplinary care which has a positive eﬀect on patient satisfaction and outcome [83]. Several discomforting symptoms of ALS can be man- aged by symptomatic treatment options, including pharmacological and non-pharmacological interven- tions [83]. For instance, spasticity can be treated with baclofen, tizanidine, cannabinoids and muscle stretch- ing, and sialorrhea can be treated with anticholinergic medications (amitriptyline, glycopyrronium bromide and oxybutynin) and botulin toxin injections into the salivatory glands. Muscle cramps may respond to mag- nesium supplements, quinine sulfate, gabapentin or car- bamazepine. A selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, amitriptyline, benzodiazepines and dextromethorphan hydrobromide/quinidine sulfate, can be used in the case of emotional lability. Dietary changes can help to improve nutrition and a gastrostomy tube is an option if the caloric intake is insuﬃcient or when swallowing becomes hazardous. Speech therapy is frequently neces- sary and assisted communication (customized software) can also be used. Non-invasive ventilation is the pre- ferred life-prolonging treatment for respiratory insuﬃciency. At all disease stages, the patient’s individ- ual wishes should be taken into account and advance care planning should be initiated early. Future prospects Over the last years, the ﬁrst steps in the direction of a precision medicine approach for ALS have been taken. For several genetic subtypes of ALS, therapies that target the upstream genetic cause are being devel- oped. One of these therapeutic approaches uses anti- sense oligonucleotides (ASOs), which are short single- stranded nucleotide sequences that bind pre-mRNA and mRNA to modulate gene expression or to alter splicing. ASOs have been used successfully in several pre-clinical models of ALS caused by SOD1 muta- tions and C9orf72 repeat expansions [84,85]. Clinical studies with intrathecal administration of ASOs tar- geted against SOD1 and C9orf72 are currently ongo- ing and the results are anxiously awaited. Stem cell treatments, such as granulocyte-colony stimulating factor-induced peripheral blood stem cells, bone mar- row mesenchymal stem cells, non-neural progenitor cells have been proved to be safe and well tolerated; however, the eﬀects on disease progression are not yet known. Several phase II and III clinical trials are ongoing [86–88]. Overall, there is hope that a better categorization of cases based on pathogenic mecha- nisms will allow for targeted therapies with beneﬁcial eﬀects in selected ALS subgroups and that ALS will become a treatable condition in the future. Acknowledgements The authors are supported by grants from KU Leu- ven (C1-C14-17-107), Opening the Future Fund (KU Leuven), the Fund for Scientiﬁc Research Flanders (FWO-Flanders), the ALS Liga Belgium, the KU Leuven funds ‘Een Hart voor ALS’, ‘Laeversfonds voor ALS Onderzoek’ and the ‘Valery Perrier Race against ALS Fund’, the Alzheimer Research Founda- tion (SAO-FRA 2017/023), the Flemish Government initiated Flanders Impulse Program on Networks for Dementia Research (VIND 135043), Flanders Innova- tion and Enterpreneurship (IWT grants Project MinE and iPSCAF), the Belgian National Lottery, the Latran Foundation, the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (755094) and the European Union’s ERA-Net for Research Programmes on Rare Diseases (INTEGRALS). PVD holds a senior clinical investigatorship of FWO-Vlaan- deren and is supported through the E. von Behring Chair for Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders. Dr V. Bercier is thanked for carefully © 2020 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology 1926 MASRORI AND VAN DAMME reading the manuscript and for giving constructive comments which substantially helped to improve the quality of this review. Disclosure of conﬂicts of interest The authors declare no ﬁnancial or other conﬂicts of interest.

SCIENCE OF MEDICINE Missouri Medicine | September/October 2013| 110:5 | 417 Management of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis ďǇdĂŚĂĂůŝ͕DΘdŝŵŽƚŚǇD͘DŝůůĞƌ͕D͕WŚ dĂŚĂĂůŝ͕D͕;ůĞŌͿ͕ŝƐĂ&ĞůůŽǁ͕ Neuromuscular Disease Division, and dŝŵŽƚŚǇD͘DŝůůĞƌ͕D͕WŚ͕ is an Assistant Professor of Neurology at the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. Contact: millert@neuro.wustl.edu ŚƩƉ͗ͬͬŵŝůůĞƌůĂď͘ǁƵƐƚů͘ĞĚƵͬ Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis is a fatal neurodegeneraƟ ǀe disease that currently remains incurable, but can be managed symptomaƟ cally oǀer the disease duraƟ on to maintain the highest quality of life possible͘ Abstract Motor Neuron Diseases (MNDs) are neurological disorders characterized by the selective and progressive degeneration of motor neurons. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), commonly known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, is the most common. ALS causes diffuse muscle weakness and death secondary to respiratory failure. The diagnosis is made clinically, supported by electrodiagnostic testing. Although medications are limited, careful attention to breathing, nutrition, and patient mobility can have a major, positive impact on the course of the disease. IntroducƟ on Motor Neuron Diseases (MNDs) are a group of progressive disorders that are invariably fatal and affect the motor system, involving the upper, lower motor neurons, or both. The most common entity under the umbrella of MNDs is Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). ALS is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that affects both upper and lower motor neurons, with pathology spanning the primary motor cortex, corticospinal tracts, brainstem and spinal cord, and causing diffuse muscle weakness, atrophy, spasticity and eventually death, typically due to respiratory failure. Other, less common subtypes of MND include Progressive Muscular Atrophy (PMA), which affects only the lower motor neurons; Primary Lateral Sclerosis (PLS), which affects only the upper motor neurons; and Progressive Bulbar Palsy (PBP), which involves both upper and lower motor neurons but remains conﬁ ned to bulbar muscles (i.e. brainstem centers responsible for facial movements, swallowing, speech, chewing and breathing). MNDs also include hereditary diseases such as Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) and Spinal- Bulbar Muscular Atrophy (SBMA), etc. This review will focus mainly on ALS.1 The incidence of ALS is estimated to be 1.7 cases per 100,000 per year,2 with the cumulative lifetime risk of developing the disease by age 75 being approximately 1:1000.3 The median age of onset is approximately 64 years for men and 67 for women with the male to female ratio estimated to be 1.8:1.4 ALS is associated with a family history in approximately 10-20% of cases. Familial ALS (FALS) is deﬁ ned as the presence of a ﬁ rst degree relative also affected by the disease and most commonly follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. As many as one-third of familial ALS cases are caused by a recently discovered repeat expansion that is also linked to Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD), and hence, a careful family history exploring the presence of a dementia 418 | 110:5 |September/October 2013 | Missouri Medicine SCIENCE OF MEDICINE syndrome and/or other neurodegenerative disorders in any family members should always be performed.5 CůŝŶŝĐĂů WƌĞƐĞŶƚĂƟ ŽŶ The hallmark of ALS is progressive development of motor symptoms and signs, with no accompanying sensory involvement. SǇŵƉƚŽŵƐ Onset typically is gradual, occurring over a period of months, and is characterized by speech, breathing, or swallowing difﬁ culty and weakness or loss of dexterity in one limb. Symptoms inevitably progress to involve other regions. Other features may include muscle wasting, muscle twitching (fasciculations), cramps, stiffness, and slowness. Fasciculations that are unaccompanied by wasting or weakness generally are due to benign causes rather than ALS. Bulbar onset with dysarthria and dysphagia occurs in one quarter to one third of cases.6,7 Bulbar disease can also manifest with voice hoarseness, sialorrhea, or “pseudobulbar affect,” i.e. mood instability characterized by insuppressible crying or laughter in response to emotional stimuli. Weight loss can occur with bulbar dysfunction or respiratory involvement. Signs The neurological exam for the diagnosis of ALS should focus on testing for upper motor neuron signs (UMN) and lower motor neuron signs (LMN). UMN signs are spasticity, hyperreﬂ exia, and slowed movements of arms or legs. LMN signs include weakness, muscle atrophy (See ) and fasciculations. SǇŵƉƚŽŵsͬSigns ƚŚĂƚ dǇƉiĐĂůůǇ DŽ NŽƚ ƉƉĞĂƌ in >S ĂnĚ SƵggĞsƚ nŽƚŚĞƌ Žƌ ĚĚiƟ ŽnĂů DiĂgnŽsis Although symptomatic stabilization in a certain affected body region is occasionally observed, remission of symptoms and signs is rare, and when present should cast doubt over the ALS diagnosis. Similarly, bowel and bladder sphincter function, extraocular muscles and the sensory system are all typically spared, and when involved should trigger further investigation into other potential causes of the patient’s illness. DisĞĂsĞ CŽƵƌsĞ Typical survival time from diagnosis is three to ﬁ ve years, although there is wide variation with some patients surviving for as little as six months and others for up to 20 years. For most patients, the pace of the disease remains relatively constant. A rapid increase in the rate of disease progression should provoke examination of other possible causes of worsening (e.g. infection). Disease Variants While ALS is typiﬁ ed by the combination of both upper and lower motor dysfunction without sensory or cognitive disturbances, there are distinct variants of ALS that do not follow this pattern. Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA) is a lower motor neuron only variant of ALS. These patients have progressive muscle atrophy and weakness, but not the hyperreﬂ exia, spasticity, and slowness typical of ALS. Many, though not all, patients with PMA eventually develop the UMN signs and symptoms. It is this variant that symptomatically overlaps most closely with multifocal motor neuropathy, a treatable ALS mimic. Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is an upper motor neuron variant. These patients have severe spasticity, hyperreﬂ exia, slowness, but do not have the muscle atrophy and weakness. Central nervous system disorders such as multiple sclerosis, strokes, and other structural lesions can give a similar presentation and are typically excluded by MRI imaging. Some of these patients do develop LMN signs and symptoms and more typical ALS. Frontotemporal Dementia with ALS (FTD/ALS): A variant of ALS that suggests a hereditary disease is Frontotemporal Dementia with ALS (FTD/ALS). Patients develop a dementia syndrome distinguished by prominent deterioration in language and behavior, concomitant with, and occasionally years preceding the typical ALS motor symptoms (see “Unravelling the Mysteries of Frontotemporal Dementia” by Ghoshal and Cairns).7 Unlike Alzheimer’s disease, memory is typically preserved early in the course /ntrinsic ŚĂnd muscůe ĂtropŚǇ commonůǇ seen in >S pĂƟ ents͘ SCIENCE OF MEDICINE Missouri Medicine | September/October 2013| 110:5 | 419 of dementia. While up to 40% of individuals with ALS may have some evidence of FTD on careful neuropsychiatric testing, only about 5-10% have fully developed FTD that manifests with behavioral changes noticed by the physician or caregivers. As noted previously, a recently reported autosomal dominant inherited expansion of a region of chromosome 9 underlies most of recognized FTD/ALS cases.5 tŚen dŽ ZeĨer Since ALS is rare and many physicians are unfamiliar with its presentation, the diagnosis is often delayed. Common clinical features that should prompt early referral to a neuromuscular specialist include: atrophy/weakness of muscles in a limb with increased deep tendon reﬂ exes in that same limb, atrophy/weakness of muscles in one area with complaint of more widespread fasciculations and cramps, and progressively slurred speech with an unremarkable MRI of the brain. DiagnŽsƟ Đ desƟ ng The disease ALS is diagnosed clinically based on the presence of UMN signs and LMN signs while excluding other possible causes. Formal criteria for ALS have been established (the El Escorial Criteria).8 Laboratory investigation is focused on deﬁ ning other causes (possible ALS mimic syndromes) which may be amenable to therapy. Testing for patients with suspected ALS typically consists of electrodiagnostic tests (electromyography [EMG] and nerve conduction studies [NCS]), MRI brain imaging, and laboratory testing (See ). Imaging Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is used to exclude any structural lesions that could potentially account for the patient’s presentation. Cervical spine disease with wasting and weakness in the arms or hands at the level of the lesion and spasticity in the legs typically is the most important condition to exclude. For presentations with speech abnormalities, excluding structural lesions (e.g., stroke) with brain MRI is important. EůeĐtrŽĚiagnŽsƟ Đ desƟ ng anĚ >aď tŽrŬ EMG and NCS evidence of denervation in three body regions with normal sensory responses is the hallmark of ALS. Treatable motor neuropathies that mimic ALS such as multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) are the most important diagnoses to exclude and can often be recognized on these tests. dests indicĂted in tŚe eǀĂůuĂƟ on oĨ pĂƟ ents suspected to ŚĂǀe >S ŚZ ĂcetǇůcŚoůine receptor͖ M'/ES: ůectromǇoŐrĂm Ănd nerǀe conducƟ on studies͖ ,SW: ,ereditĂrǇ SpĂsƟ c WĂrĂpůeŐiĂ͖ MuS<: muscůe speciĮ c ŬinĂse͖ OWM: ocuůopŚĂrǇnŐeĂů muscuůĂr dǇstropŚǇ͖ SM: SpinĂůͲuůbĂr MuscuůĂr tropŚǇ͖ SM: SpinĂů MuscuůĂr tropŚǇ͖ SO1: Superoǆide dismutĂse 1͖ ZES: ZepeƟ Ɵ ǀe nerǀe sƟ muůĂƟ on͖ s': ǀoůtĂŐeͲŐĂted cĂůcium cŚĂnneů͘ 420 | 110:5 |September/October 2013 | Missouri Medicine SCIENCE OF MEDICINE Laboratory tests are focused on excluding autoimmune-mediated neuropathy, such as Multifocal Motor Neuropathy (MMN). Anti-GM1 or NS6S antibodies are present in up to 64% of MMN patients9 and combined with characteristic changes on EMG/NCS strongly suggest MMN, a disorder that often is responsive to immunomodulatory therapy. A low vitamin B12 level or thyroid disorders may complicate management and thus should be identiﬁ ed and corrected. Low copper can present with motor greater than sensory disturbances, although the sensory complaints provide a clue that ALS is unlikely. 'eneƟ Đ desƟ ng Genetic testing is recommended for patients with a family history of ALS. The most common genetic cause for familial ALS known to date is the hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 gene, which is also known to be associated with FTD. A family history of FTD, even without an associated motor syndrome might spark testing for a C9ORF72 mutation.5 Genetic counseling before testing is appropriate for patients and is strongly recommended before asymptomatic family members are tested. Management Following a diagnosis of ALS, the patient and care providers should receive regular support from a multidisciplinary care team. While the medications available to slow the progression of ALS are limited, careful attention to breathing, nutrition, and patient mobility can have a positive impact on the course of the disease. ZiůƵǌŽůe Riluzole (Rilutek®) is the only FDA approved drug for ALS, and has been shown to prolong survival in ALS patients by three to six months. The modest beneﬁ t and high cost of the medication has limited enthusiasm for this treatment among some neurologists and patients, but the medication should be discussed with each patient. Riluzole is well tolerated overall, but patients should be monitored for liver toxicity. Elevation of hepatic enzymes to three to ﬁ ve times the upper limit of normal can occur but is typically self-limited and transient.10 It is generally recommended to monitor liver enzymes at one week, one month and every six months after the initiation of riluzole, and to stop the drug if liver enzymes are elevated to more than ﬁ ve times the upper limit of normal. Riluzole typically is given at 50 mg twice per day. ZesƉiraƟ Žn Respiratory function should be assessed by measuring forced vital capacity (FVC)11 and maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP; a.k.a. negative inspiratory force (NIF)), and nocturnal oximetry12. The potential need for non-invasive ventilation (NIV) should be discussed with patients early in disease, and offered when FVC is less than 50%.13 Patients using NIV have been shown in a randomized controlled study to have a median survival beneﬁ t of 205 days.14 NƵtriƟ Žn Dysphagia is a common problem for ALS patients, leading to choking, aspiration, poor nutrition, and weight loss. At the ﬁ rst signs of dysphagia, a swallowing study should be obtained by a speech pathologist. A change in diet to soft consistency, high caloric foods may initially ameliorate the problem, but in many ALS cases, oral intake becomes insufﬁ cient. Supplementation, via percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG), is often required. PEG placement in ALS patients results in the stabilization, and occasionally partial regain, of weight15 and may prolong survival 16. In discussing PEG tube it is important to emphasize that that oral feeding does not have to completely stop. The decision for a PEG placement should be made early in the course of the disease as restricted pulmonary function (FVC<50%) increases the chances of procedure-related complications.17 SiaůŽrrŚea Sialorrhea and drooling in ALS is not related to saliva overproduction, but results from an inability to adequately handle and swallow saliva. In some cases, a suction machine is sufﬁ cient to alleviate the problem. Traditional pharmacologic treatment of sialorrhea involves the use of anticholinergic agents, including glycopyrrolate (Robinul®), amitriptyline (Elavil®), benztropinemesylate (Cogentin®), trihexyphenidyl (Artane®), transdermal hyoscine (Scopolamine®), and atropine drops in mouth13. Common side effects include excessive drying of the nasopharynx, constipation, urinary retention, confusion, and sedation, particularly in the elderly. Other treatments include Botox injections and low dose radiation therapy to the salivary glands. WseƵĚŽďƵůďar ī aĐt Antidepressants have been historically the mainstay of treatment for management of pseudobulbar affect. Both selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and tricylic antidepressants (TCAs) may be helpful, with TCAs superior in treating concomitant sialorrhea when present18. More recently, a ﬁ xed-dose combination of dextromethorphan (DM)/quinidine (Q) (30 mg DM/30 mg Q BID) has been shown to be effective in a randomized trial.19 Possible side effects include dizziness, nausea, and somnolence. EmŽƟ Žnaů SƵƉƉŽrt The diagnosis of ALS can be emotionally difﬁ cult for patients and their caregivers. Many patients ﬁ nd antidepressants (SSRI) medications helpful for mood even SCIENCE OF MEDICINE Missouri Medicine | September/October 2013| 110:5 | 421 MM when not meeting the full deﬁ nition of depression. Support groups, available in most areas, can be very important for families and caregivers (see web resources at end of article). EnĚ ŽĨ >iĨe IssƵes A discussion regarding end of life planning should be initiated relatively early in disease. For example, code status should be clariﬁ ed. Most patients do not inquire about assisted suicide, though physicians should be prepared to discuss this issue. OtŚer WrŽďůems Patients with ALS may develop other complaints related to the disease pathology, directly or indirectly, such as pain, spasticity, cramps, fatigue, depression and sleep difﬁ culty. There are limited data focused on treatment of these problems in ALS patients, therefore standard management as with other conditions is recommended. Spasticity is generally treated with baclofen or tizanidine as ﬁ rst line agents. Agents of choice for treatment of cramps are gabapentin and phenytoin,20 while quinine has been recently restricted to treatment of malaria by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) given its serious cardiac side effects proﬁ le. Summary Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that currently remains incurable, but can be managed symptomatically over the disease duration to maintain the highest quality of life possible. Management is focused on controlling the symptoms, improving patient safety and maintaining autonomy to the extent possible. Multidisciplinary care in a coordinated ALS clinic setting is recommended. A careful family history is important to determine the presence of disease in other family members, and increase the likelihood of ﬁ nding a genetic cause of the patient’s ALS syndrome. Vigorous clinical and basic research in ALS may ultimately bring about treatments to successfully alter the disease course.1 ZeĨerenĐes 1. Bedlack RS, Mitsumoto H. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis : a patient care guide for clinicians. 2. Sorenson EJ, Stalker AP, Kurland LT, Windebank AJ. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1925 to 1998. Neurology. Jul 23 2002;59(2):280-282. 3. Johnston CA, Stanton BR, Turner MR, et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in an urban setting: a population based study of inner city London. J Neurol. Dec 2006;253(12):1642-1643. 4. Traynor BJ, Codd MB, Corr B, Forde C, Frost E, Hardiman O. Incidence and prevalence of ALS in Ireland, 1995- 1997: a population-based study. Neurology. Feb 1999;52(3):504-509. 5. Renton AE, Majounie E, Waite A, et al. A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron. Oct 20 2011;72(2):257-268. 6. Chio A, Calvo A, Moglia C, Mazzini L, Mora G. Phenotypic heterogeneity of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a population based study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. Jul 2011;82(7):740-746. 7. Lomen-Hoerth C, Anderson T, Miller B. The overlap of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. Oct 8 2002;59(7):1077-1079. 8. Brooks BR. El Escorial World Federation of Neurology criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Subcommittee on Motor Neuron Diseases/ Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis of the World Federation of Neurology Research Group on Neuromuscular Diseases and the El Escorial “Clinical limits of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis” workshop contributors. J Neurol Sci. Jul 1994;124 Suppl:96-107. 9. Pestronk A, Chuquilin M, Choksi R. Motor neuropathies and serum IgM binding to NS6S heparin disaccharide or GM1 ganglioside. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. Jul 2010;81(7):726-730. 10. Lacomblez L, Bensimon G, Leigh PN, Guillet P, Meininger V. Dose-ranging study of riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/Riluzole Study Group II. Lancet. May 25 1996;347(9013):1425-1431. 11. Czaplinski A, Yen AA, Appel SH. Forced vital capacity (FVC) as an indicator of survival and disease progression in an ALS clinic population. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. Mar 2006;77(3):390-392. 12. Jackson CE, Rosenfeld J, Moore DH, et al. A preliminary evaluation of a prospective study of pulmonary function studies and symptoms of hypoventilation in ALS/MND patients. J Neurol Sci. Oct 15 2001;191(1-2):75-78. 13. Miller RG, Rosenberg JA, Gelinas DF, et al. Practice parameter: The care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (An evidence-based review). Muscle Nerve. Aug 1999;22(8):1104-1118. 14. Bourke SC, Tomlinson M, Williams TL, Bullock RE, Shaw PJ, Gibson GJ. Effects of non-invasive ventilation on survival and quality of life in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. Feb 2006;5(2):140-147. 15. Kasarskis EJ, Scarlata D, Hill R, Fuller C, Stambler N, Cedarbaum JM. A retrospective study of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in ALS patients during the BDNF and CNTF trials. J Neurol Sci. Oct 31 1999;169(1-2):118-125. 16. Mazzini L, Corra T, Zaccala M, Mora G, Del Piano M, Galante M. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy and enteral nutrition in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol. Oct 1995;242(10):695-698. 17. Mathus-Vliegen LM, Louwerse LS, Merkus MP, Tytgat GN, Vianney de Jong JM. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and impaired pulmonary function. Gastrointest Endosc. Jul-Aug 1994;40(4):463-469. 18. Miller RG, Rosenberg JA, Gelinas DF, et al. Practice parameter: the care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology: ALS Practice Parameters Task Force. Neurology. Apr 22 1999;52(7):1311-1323. 19. Brooks BR, Thisted RA, Appel SH, et al. Treatment of pseudobulbar affect in ALS with dextromethorphan/quinidine: a randomized trial. Neurology. Oct 26 2004;63(8):1364-1370. 20. Miller TM, Layzer RB. Muscle cramps. Muscle Nerve. Oct 2005;32(4):431-442. DisĐůŽsures T Bali has no disclosures. T Miller receives research support from the following: NIH/NIA, NIH/NINDS, Project 5 for ALS, Tau Consortium, ALS Association, Muscular Dystrophy Association, , Mallinckrodt Foundation, Hope Center for Neurological Disorders at Washington University, Washington University ICTS, Cure PSP, Isis Pharmaceuticals, Regulus Therapeutics and has ﬁ led patents in conjunction with Washington University regarding use of antisense oligonucleotides based therapeutic strategies for neurodegenerative diseases. teď ZesŽurĐes ĨŽr >S ͻ ŚƩ p://neuromuscuůĂr͘ǁustů͘edu/motor͘Śtmů ͻ ŚƩ p://mdĂ͘orŐ/diseĂse/ĂmǇotropŚicͲůĂterĂůͲscůerosis ͻ ŚƩ p://ǁǁǁ͘ĂůsĂ͘orŐ/ ͻ ŚƩ p://miůůerůĂb͘ǁustů͘edu/