Received 08/18/2023 
Review began 08/24/2023 
Review ended 09/12/2023 
Published 09/18/2023
© Copyright 2023
Hoxhaj et al. This is an open access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License CC-BY 4.0.,
which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original author and source are credited.
Exploring Advancements in the Treatment of
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: A Comprehensive
Review of Current Modalities and Future
Prospects
Pranvera Hoxhaj   , Natasha Hastings  , Meet Popatbhai Kachhadia  , Riya Gupta  , Udeept Sindhu  ,
Shreya A. Durve  , Areeba Azam  , María J. Auz Vinueza  , Bhuvan . 
 , Shwe H. Win 
 , Deepak C. Rathod
 , Aiman P. Afsar 
1. Medicine, University of Medicine, Tirana, Tirana, ALB 2. Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Scher & Kerenyi MDS, New
York, USA 3. Medicine, St. George's University School of Medicine, St. George's, GRD 4. Internal Medicine, Pandit
Dindayal Upadhyay (PDU) Medical College, Civil Hospital Campus, Rajkot, IND 5. Medicine and Surgery, Shri Atal
Bihari Vajpayee Medical College and Research Institute, Bangalore, IND 6. Medicine and Surgery, Kasturba Medical
College, Manipal, Manipal, IND 7. General Medicine, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research,
Chennai, IND 8. Medicine, Lahore Medical and Dental College, Lahore, PAK 9. Critical Care, Hospital de Especialidades
de las Fuerzas Armadas N1, Quito, ECU 10. Internal Medicine, Government Medical College, Amritsar, Amritsar, IND
11. Medicine, University of Medicine, Magway, Magway, MMR 12. Medicine, Chandramma Dayanand Sagar Institute of
Medical Education and Research, Harohalli, IND 13. Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, IND
Corresponding author: Aiman P. Afsar, afsaraiman@gmail.com
Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal and incurable disease requiring a multidisciplinary treatment
approach and a collaborative therapeutic effort. A combination of both upper and lower motor neuron
degeneration ultimately leads to respiratory failure, similar to other dementia-type neurodegenerative
diseases. The aim of this paper is to pioneer current ALS research by carrying out a narrative literature
review of the current treatment modalities of the disease. Through these efforts, we hope to condense the
most pertinent information regarding current treatments and enhance the management of ALS patients as a
whole, giving these patients a better quality of life as the search for a cure continues. We used a Pubmed
search strategy and specific MeSH terms for the selection of the literature articles using the keywords "ALS,"
"new treatment," "treatment," and "symptomatic treatment." A combination of pharmaceutical interventions,
psychological support, and physical rehabilitation has been most effective in enhancing the quality of life of
patients with ALS (PALS). Among potential pharmacological therapies, only a few have been approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration(FDA) to be used to treat ALS and its symptoms. Other treatment
modalities being considered include gene therapy, cellular therapy, psychological therapy, physical therapy,
and speech therapy, alongside robotics, alternative feeding methods, and communication devices.
Categories: Neurology, Therapeutics, Palliative Care
Keywords: supportive care, robotics, pharmaceutical interventions, psychological support, cell therapy, gene therapy,
neurodegenerative, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Introduction And Background
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rare neurological disease that affects motor neurons in the central
nervous system, resulting in progressive degeneration and eventual death of these electrochemical
connections. ALS causes a combination of upper and lower motor neuron disease, and the symptoms vary
depending on the muscle controlled by the affected neurons and whether upper or lower motor neurons are
predominantly affected. The main manifestations of upper motor neuron disease are muscle weakness,
increased muscle tone and stiffness (spasticity), increased reflexes (hyperreflexia), and abnormal speech and
swallowing [1]. In contrast, manifestations of lower motor neuron disease present as muscle wasting
(atrophy) and twitching (fasciculations), loss of muscle tone (flaccid paralysis), and decreased reflexes
(hyporeflexia). The exact cause of sporadic ALS is unknown. It has been hypothesized that dysfunctional and
interconnected molecular mechanisms contribute to disease progression in ALS. Gene mutations, most
commonly C9orf72, SOD1, TDP-43, FUS, and TBK-1, account for 15% of all patients with ALS (PALS). Of
these mutations, the expansion that occurs in the C9orf72 gene accounts for 30-50% of familial ALS and 7%
of sporadic ALS [2]. Affecting approximately 4.42 per 100,000 individuals, death from the illness usually
occurs due to respiratory failure three to five years after the onset of symptoms. Males are slightly more
affected by the disease than females [1]. Due to the inevitable fatal nature of this disease and its increasing
incidence, resources have been allocated toward discovering treatment modalities that will positively affect
patient outcomes and slow disease progression. Effective and safe treatment modalities that may change the
progression of the disease remain elusive, with current management protocols used in clinical practice
showing variable results in improving morbidity and mortality [3]. The diagnosis of ALS is suggested by
clinical examination that reveals both upper and lower motor neuron failure. Electrodiagnosis analysis forms
a crucial part of the diagnosis. A combination of both physical exams and clinical diagnostics is necessary
1, 2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
 
Open Access Review
Article
 DOI: 10.7759/cureus.45489
How to cite this article
Hoxhaj P, Hastings N, Kachhadia M, et al. (September 18, 2023) Exploring Advancements in the Treatment of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: A
Comprehensive Review of Current Modalities and Future Prospects. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489

for correctly diagnosing ALS. Conventional imaging studies, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
computed tomography (CT) scans, are used to exclude other diseases that present similarly to ALS,
demonstrating high levels of sensitivity [4,5]. Cellular therapy has shown substantial therapeutic potential
in treating PALS over recent years. Still, the safety and efficacy of cellular therapy in PALS remain under
debate [1]. Cellular therapies are working to optimize the dose required for treatment and to find an optimal
dosing method that may further encourage full adherence to treatment by PALS. Another crucial component
of the multidisciplinary approach to ALS management is physical therapy (PT). PT can address problematic
symptoms of ALS, such as fatigue and muscle stiffness, through energy conservation and stretching
exercises, respectively [3]. Restrengthening key respiratory muscle groups is undeniably necessary to delay
fatality due to respiratory failure. PT has been shown to significantly improve the quality of life of PALS [6].
PALS experience a range of physical, emotional, and cognitive challenges, which can make it difficult to
address all aspects of their care. Developing interventions that are tailored to treat the cognitive and
behavioral side effects of ALS is complex. Further research is needed to develop nonpharmacological
treatments that may reduce the psychological burden that comes with the disease for both PALS patients
and their caregivers [7].
This narrative review synthesizes a wide range of research and expert opinions on ALS and its treatments
into a concise and comprehensive overview, which includes pharmacological therapies, PT, respiratory
support, and palliative care approaches. Overall, through this review, we aim to develop a vital reference
tool capable of enhancing the understanding of ALS and aiding in the improvement of treatment outcomes.
Review
Methodology
This is a narrative literature review of ALS and current treatment modalities of the disease based on articles
obtained from PubMed using the keywords “ALS," "new treatment," "treatment," and "symptomatic
treatment.” Using the search strategy involving "ALS diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, prevention and control,
psychology, radiotherapy, rehabilitation, surgery, and therapy" as MeSH terms for the selection of the
literature articles, we found 786 articles. Inclusion criteria involved primary research publications,
systematic reviews, and meta-analyses published in English, focusing on the treatment of ALS in humans
from the timeline spanning from 2015 to July 2023. Animal studies and studies without relevant outcomes
were excluded. The titles and abstracts of the retrieved articles were screened independently by three
reviewers to determine their relevance to the research topic and were narrowed down to 37 articles (Figure
1). Full-text articles were further evaluated in detail. This narrative review has been done considering the
current situation of PALS to determine the latest advancements in its treatment and their effectiveness
compared to the conventional therapies available. This could have an impact on disease progression and
thus the ability to influence the severity of possible complications.
FIGURE 1: PRISMA Flowchart Showing the Selection of Articles
Results
Although ALS remains incurable, effective management of symptoms and proactively addressing current
clinical complications hold great significance for the patients affected by the disease. Fortunately, there is
strong evidence suggesting that early detection of the disease contributes to extending patient survival.
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
2 of 11

Given the heterogeneity of symptoms of ALS, supportive and palliative care can be provided by specialized
multidisciplinary teams, composed of healthcare professionals providing care and support for the patients
and their families. Our research reveals that treatments for PALS predominantly fall into two distinct
categories. The first category includes pharmaceutical compounds that mainly influence disease
progression, and the second category includes supportive and palliative care of the symptoms.
Riluzole, the original US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved remedy for ALS, belongs to the
benzothiazole class of drugs and acts as a glutamate antagonist that contributes to the death of upper and
lower motor neurons in this disease. While riluzole can slow down the disease’s progression and impact
muscle function deterioration, it only results in a minor increase in survival, spanning from three to six
months [8,9]. Edaravone, the next FDA-approved medication for the treatment of ALS, works as a powerful
antioxidant and scavenger of free radicals. While the exact way in which edaravone works to treat ALS is not
fully understood, its antioxidant properties are thought to play a crucial role, as oxidative stress is a
contributing factor to disease progression in PALS [10,11]. Sodium phenylbutyrate/taurursodiol is a
medication approved for treating PALS because it reduces cellular stress pathways and promotes nerve cell
survival. Patients treated with this medication have shown a slower decline in daily functioning and have
longer overall survival rates compared with PALS treated with a placebo [12]. Tofersen is an approved RNA-
based therapy designed to reduce the synthesis of superoxide dismutase type 1 (SOD1) protein by degrading
toxic clumps of SOD1 mRNA (superoxide dismutase type-1 messenger ribonucleic acid). Tofersen initiation
reduced neurofilament-axonal (nerve) injury and neurodegeneration and improved disease outcomes [13-
15]. The dextromethorphan hydrobromide/quinidine sulfate (DMQ) combination is a medication that is
prescribed in patients with ALS to treat the underlying pseudobulbar affect (PBA). This treatment has been
shown to improve three bulbar functions: swallowing, speech, and salivation. According to a trial study,
both PALS groups treated with DMQ, regardless of having or not having PBA symptoms, showed impactful
improvements in their total Center for Neurologic Study - Bulbar Function Scale (CNS-BFS) scores [16,17].
Some common therapy interventions that improve respiratory outcome measures and increase survival of
PALS are cough augmentation, lung volume recruitment training, airway clearance techniques, assisted
breath stacking, and manually assisted cough [18,19]. Dysphagia management and nutritional support
involve detecting the evaluation of swallowing by fibro-endoscopy and fluoroscopy, changes in diet
consistency, the loss of body weight, and indicating the start of alternative feeding methods such as
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) or jejunostomy [20]. Speech therapy is indicated in the initial
stages. In advanced settings, speech therapy is accompanied by an electronic communication device (such as
computers, telephones, voice output, and keyboard or head-eye-tracking devices) [21-23]. PT is an integral
component of the ALS multidisciplinary team and is tailored to the individual’s needs and goals. Focusing
on addressing the symptoms and maximizing function and participation can enable PALS to achieve a better
quality of life. The most commonly used PT techniques for PALS are a range of motion (ROM), stretching,
resistance, and aerobic exercises [6,24]. Psychological distress is a common experience for PALS, often
leading to feelings such as anxiety, hopelessness, despair, demoralization, and depression. Effective
psychological interventions should be used to assist the patient and their loved ones in managing the fear of
death and dying and dealing with the challenges that arise due to visible changes in relationships and social
roles. Table 1 presents the symptom-wise pharmacological treatment of ALS.
Indication
Medication
Dose
Side Effects
Spasticity
Baclofen
5mg 1-3 times/day
Hypotonia, drowsiness, nausea,
vomiting, excessive sweating
Nabiximols
Buccal spray: 4-8 sprays/day
Tachycardia, dizziness
Tizanidine
2-4mg 2 times/day
Hypotension, dizziness, asthenia,
xerostomia
Onabotilinum-
toxin A
Different units of intramuscular site injection
 Xerostomia, dry eyes, dropping
eyebrows, headache, muscle
weakness
Cramps/Pain
Tizanidine
2-4mg 2 times/day
Hypotension, dizziness, asthenia,
xerostomia
Gabapentin
Titrating from 100mg/day to 900mg 3 times/day orally
Fatigue, arm and foot edema, mood
changes, vomiting, blurred vision
Levetiracetam
500-1000mg twice/day orally
Fatigue, anxiety, headache, weight
loss, sleepiness
Mexiletine
150mg twice/daily orally, starting dose 150mg/day for 3 days
Dizziness, hepatotoxicity, ataxia,
nausea, vomiting
Baclofen
5-10mg 3 times/day up to 80-120mg/day orally
Drowsiness, hypotonia
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
3 of 11

Quinine sulphate
260-325mg daily
Abdominal pain, chills, tinnitus,
impaired hearing
Phenytoin
300mg daily orally
Headaches, drowsiness, vomiting
Vitamin E
400 UI (unite) /day orally
 
Fatigue
Modafinil
100-200mg/day in 1-2 doses orally
Headache
Sialorrhea
N-acetylcysteine
200-400mg 3 times/day orally
Rash, bronchospasms, chest
tightness
Scopolamine
1 transdermal patch every 3 days
Tachycardia, xerostomia,
hyperthermia, flushed skin, urinary
retention, constipation
Hyoscyamine
1-2 transdermal patches every 3 days, OR oral sustained
release 0.375-0.75mg every 12 hours OR fast-acting 0.125-
0.25mg before meals
Tachycardia, xerostomia,
hyperthermia, flushed skin, urinary
retention, constipation
Atropine
0.4mg every 4-6 hours as sublingual drops
Tachycardia, xerostomia,
hyperthermia, flushed skin, urinary
retention, constipation
Glycopyrrolate
1-2mg 3 times/day orally
Xerostomia, nasal congestion,
flushing, constipation, nausea,
vomiting
Rimabotulinum-
toxin B
Parotid gland injection of 500-1500 units, submandibular
gland injection of 250 units in each
Dysphagia, xerostomia, antibody
formation
Pseudobulbar
affect
Amitriptyline
Titration from 10-25mg/day orally to 10-150mg/day
Sedation, suicidal thoughts and
behavior
Fluvoxamine
100-200mg/day orally
Insomnia, headache, drowsiness,
nausea, suicidal thoughts, and
behavior
Dextromethorphan
quinidine
20 and 10mg/day for 7 days, then twice/day orally
Diarrhea, nausea, weakness
Anxiety
Buspirone
10mg 3times/day orally
Dizziness, headache, nausea,
trouble sleeping
Diazepam
2-10mg 3 times/day orally
Drowsiness, headache, constipation,
Lorazepam
0.5-1.0mg 2 times/day orally
 
Mirtazapine
5-30 mg
Drowsiness, constipation, headaches
Depression
SSRI
antidepressants
20-100mg orally daily
 
Tricyclic
antidepressants
20-100mg dailly orally
 
Bupropion
100mg 2 times/day orally
 
Venlafaxine
37.5-75mg 2 or 3 times/day orally
 
Urinary
urgency
Oxybutynin
2.5-5mg 2 times/day orally OR 3.9mg transdermal patches
Headache, dry eyes, vomiting,
stomachache, vertigo
Tolterodine
1-2mg 2 times/day orally
Vertigo, headache, xerostomia
TABLE 1: Symptom-Wise Pharmacological Treatment of ALS
Discussion
ALS is an overwhelming neurodegenerative disease that affects patients physically and psychologically,
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
4 of 11

reducing their quality of life and survival. Currently, there is no available cure for ALS. Scarcely any drugs
have been approved by the FDA that can slow the course of the disease and improve the quality of life.
Therefore, the management of ALS remains supportive and symptom-based. In recent years, research on
new treatment strategies has increased, taking heed of gene therapy, cellular therapy, and neuroprotective
agents.
Pharmacological management
There are limited approved drugs that slow disease progression by prolonging autonomy and increasing
survival rates (measured by the ALS functional rating scale (ALSFRS-R) [3].
Riluzole, (1,6-(Trifluoromethoxy)-2-Benzothiazolamine)
A benzothiazole derivative was the first drug approved by the FDA for the treatment of ALS and has been
used since 1995, showing a potentially beneficial effect for patients. Clinical studies have shown that
riluzole treatment reduces the loss of motoneurons and increases survival by 9% in one year. This drug acts
by multiple mechanisms to decrease excitotoxicity. It is thought that riluzole may have some
neuroprotective effects. This is because its anti-glutamatergic agent inhibits the presynaptic release of
neurotransmitter glutamate by acting as a specific sodium channel blocker on presynaptic neurons. In
addition, it reduces the reuptake of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and enhances GABA receptors.
Recent studies have associated riluzole with another mechanism of action (MOA). It inhibits protein kinase
CK1δ catalytic activity, which avoids the cytoplasmic compartmentalization of TDP-43 (transactive response
DNA binding protein of 43 k), resulting in the suppression of excitotoxicity. The recommended initial dose
of riluzole for the treatment of ALS is 50 mg taken orally twice daily. After initiation of therapy, the dose can
be increased to a maximum of 100 mg twice daily based on individual tolerance and clinical response. It is
considered a well-tolerated drug among patients, even though it has shown some adverse effects, such as
gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, and asthenia [1,3,25].
Edaravone (MCI-186)
Twenty-two years later, in 2017, edaravone was the second compound to be FDA-approved for the treatment
of ALS. It is a free radical scavenger that protects motor neurons from damage by free radicals and oxidative
stress by eliminating lipid peroxyl radicals and peroxy nitrate [1]. There have been multiple trials that have
studied the efficacy of this drug. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study with 137
participants proved the use of edaravone as an ALS treatment. It included only patients with early-stage
ALS, defined as a disease duration of two years or less, a score of at least two for every item of the revised
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis functional rating scale (ALSFRS-R), and forced vital capacity (FVC) of 80% or
more, along with a probable or definite ALS diagnosis defined by the El Escorial criteria [3]. The study
demonstrated a decrease in motor decline and motor neuron degeneration. Furthermore, edaravone efficacy
has been demonstrated by its antioxidant properties and the ability to reduce mutant SOD1 accumulation.
Edaravone’s chemical name is 3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-pyrazolin-5-one, and it is available as an intravenous
(IV) infusion containing 30 mg edaravone in 100 mL of isotonic solution. The recommended dose of the
initial treatment cycle with edaravone is 60 mg administered via 60-minute IV infusion once daily for 14
days, followed by a 14-day drug-free period. Subsequent treatment cycles consist of once-daily dosing for 10
of 14 days, each continued by a 14-day drug-free period. The drug is 92% protein-bound, primarily to
albumin. The drug is metabolized in the liver and kidney. It is excreted mainly in the urine in its glucuronide
conjugate form. Clinical trials have demonstrated that, even though edaravone has many side effects, it is a
treatment that is well tolerated and, more importantly, decreases disease progression. Common adverse
events include contusion, confusion, constipation, eczema, headache, bruising, gait disturbance, and
contact dermatitis. Severe side effects were also present, such as hypersensitivity, dysphagia, sulfite allergic
reactions, and anaphylaxis [10,11,26].
Sodium Phenylbutyrate and Taurursodiol Combination (Relyvrio)
The combination of these drugs has exhibited an effect in reducing neuronal cell death and oxidative injury
by diminishing stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondrial dysfunction. A reduction in
disease progression has been documented with the use of both drugs. Sodium phenylbutyrate is an inhibitor
of the histone deacetylase enzyme, which regulates transcription and allows normal protein aggregation.
Studies in animal models showed that sodium phenylbutyrate improved cell survival. Moreover, clinical
trials have demonstrated that this drug increases blood histone acetylation levels. The efficacy of Relyvrio
(sodium phenylbutyrate and taurursodiol) was demonstrated in a 24-week, randomized, placebo-controlled,
multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group study. In the trial, 137 PALS received either Relyvrio or a placebo.
The study showed that the patients treated with Relyvrio experienced a slower rate of decline in the clinical
assessment of daily functioning than those who received the placebo. Additionally, prolonged survival was
observed in the long-term analysis of patients who received Relyvrio when compared to the placebo arm.
Notable adverse reactions suffered by patients taking Relyvrio include upper respiratory tract infections,
abdominal pain, nausea, and diarrhea. Relyvrio contains taurursodiol, a bile acid, which may cause
worsening diarrhea in patients with additional disorders that interfere with bile acid metabolism.
Taurursodiol is commonly used to treat chronic cholestatic liver diseases and gallstones. Its anti-apoptotic
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
5 of 11

effect occurs through either regulating the expression of specific targets of apoptosis or mitochondrial
membrane stabilization. This results in a neuroprotective effect and decreases disease progression. Sodium
phenylbutyrate/taurursodiol has been developed as an oral suspension that contains 3 g of sodium
phenylbutyrate and 1 g of taurursodiol. The drug was given once daily for three weeks, followed by twice a
day [3,12,27,28].
Tofersen
A SOD1 antisense oligonucleotide decreases the synthesis of SOD1 protein. The MOA occurs through the
destruction of SOD1 mRNA. Through this mechanism, the drug reduces plasma neurofilament light (NfL), a
biomarker of neurodegeneration and axonal injury. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial,
tofersen reduced the levels of SOD1 proteins in the CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) by 36%. Earlier Tofersen
initiation led to better measurement outcomes. These findings show a crucial clinical benefit in PALS. The
reduction in NfL was consistent across all subgroups based on disease duration since symptom onset, site of
symptoms, and use of other medications for ALS treatment. Patients were administered three initial doses
of 100 mg (15 ml) of tofersen intrathecally at intervals of 14 days. After this, the therapy consists of a
maintenance dose administered every 28 days. Treatment with torsefen showed moderate side effects:
procedural pain, postlumbar syndrome related to lumbar puncture, headache, myalgia, and arthralgia
[14,15].
Emerging modalities
Gene Therapy
Encouraging new treatment options for ALS include gene therapies that work by silencing the expression of
harmful genes by replacing the mutated gene with the regular copy or editing the mutant genome, adding
genes that introduce a protective or favorable factor, or adding genes with a knockout effect targeting RNA
to decrease the expression of the causative gene [1].
Cellular Therapy
It is a treatment modality consisting of both human and nonhuman cells that target multiple pathogenic
mechanisms: host cell replacement, immunomodulation, neurotrophic factor secretion, and predominantly
neuroinflammation. Seven major cell types are used: mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), embryonic stem cells,
mononuclear cells, neural precursor cells, neural stem cells, glial stem cells, and induced pluripotent stem
cells (IPSCs). Transplanted cells can be administered via different routes: intrathecal, intravenous, and
intramuscular injection [1,2]. The aim is to make use of stem cells in the transplantation process where there
is a displacement of dysfunctional motor neurons for the repair of the neuromuscular pathology of ALS.
Experimental Stem Cell Therapies
Stem cells play the most important role in the sustenance and regeneration of tissues in our body. Their
exclusive properties include multipotency, self-restoration, and long-term survival. Stem cell therapies have
proven to have encouraging results regarding the regeneration and replacement of neural tissues. Somatic
cells of ALS patients can be reconfigured into IPSCs, which can generate certain neuronal stem cells. These
IPSCs taken from PALS could play a major role in cell transplantation for the treatment of ALS and in
understanding the pathophysiology of the disease [10]. NurOwn is a treatment in an experimental phase
that uses MSCs, which are engineered to secrete neurotrophic factors that induce nerve regeneration by
signaling neuron-neuron communication. It is deduced that injecting MSCs into the spinal canal showed a
distinctive improvement in motor neuron survival. Analyses indicated a treatment benefit for patients with
less severe ALS at the trial's start [29]. NeuroNata-R (lenzumestrocel) is an MSC-based therapy that uses
intrathecal autologous bone marrow-derived MSC injections. The trial study showed significant therapeutic
benefits lasting at least six months with safety in PALS [30]. AstroRx is a trial medication that contains
nervous system support cells called astrocytes engineered from human embryonic stem cells. Findings from a
small phase I/II study suggested that this experimental therapy may help slow ALS progression [31].
Other therapeutic strategies
In the last few years, many therapies have been tested. Among them are axonal transport, posttranslational
modification, DNA damage, nucleocytoplasmic transport, and molecular tweezers. Of the strategies
mentioned, posttranslational changes (PTMs) are one of the therapies with more studies regarding their use
in ALS treatment. PTMs influence proteins that are involved in ALS pathogenesis, such as FUS, SOD1, and
TDP-43. Regarding the other therapies, axonal and nucleocytoplasmic transport strategies are currently
being tested in clinical trials, with no clear understanding of their MOA. No clinical trials are addressing
DNA damage [3].
Robotics
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
6 of 11

There are striking technological innovations that are effective in the everyday use of ALS patients.
Exoskeleton robotic devices are designed to enhance the gait capability of ALS patients. Such
electromechanical wearable systems can be monitored via several aspects, such as speed, position, force,
actuator, and algorithms, or by engaging electroencephalographic (EEG) signals or electromyographic (EMG)
signals. Electric-powered wheelchairs, monitored through electro-optic tools, also proved to be helpful for
ALS patients. In patients with restricted motor functions and severe disabilities, electrically adjusted beds
can aid them with changing positions. Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) could also benefit ALS patients with
severe disabilities [3].
Symptomatic Treatment
Symptomatic management has been directed to reduce clinical features that affect the quality and
expectancy of life. It focuses on treating symptoms such as pain, muscle spasticity, respiratory insufficiency,
and mood disturbances. Approximately 75% of patients develop limb weakness, and 25% develop bulbar
symptoms. As mentioned above, bulbar symptoms are characterized by weakness, tongue twitching,
dysarthria, and dysphagia, the last two being the most common in ALS [1].
The Nuedexta treatment trial showed that the administration of dextromethorphan and quinidine improved
pseudobulbar effects such as speech, swallowing, and salivation. Dextromethorphan is a sigma-1 receptor
agonist that enhances serotonin uptake by inhibiting ion channel gates and potentiating ligand-gated
channels. On the other hand, quinidine inhibits the cytochrome p450 isoenzyme, protecting
dextromethorphan from o-demethylation. This increases the systematic bioavailability of
dextromethorphan. At the beginning of the study, it was debatable whether DMQ treatment would improve
impaired speech and swallowing in patients who did not exhibit pseudobulbar affect. However, it was found
that all PALS, regardless of whether ALS disease was associated with or without PBA, experienced an
equivalent improvement in their total CNS-BFS scores after DMQ treatment. Symptomatic frontal
disinhibition (pseudobulbar affect), characterized by sudden episodes of crying and/or laughing, can also be
treated by dextromethorphan hydrobromide and quinidine sulfate drugs that were approved by the FDA in
2011. The dextromethorphan hydrobromide and quinidine sulfate combination should be given at dosages of
20 mg and 10 mg, respectively [3,23].
Regarding the treatment of other symptoms that are present in ALS patients, spasticity can be treated by
cannabinoids, tizanidine, and baclofen, and sialorrhea can be treated by botulin toxin injected into the
salivary gland or anticholinergic medication. Medications such as magnesium supplements, quinine sulfate,
gabapentin, or carbamazepine are aimed at treating muscle cramps [1].
Other symptoms that are present in ALS patients are treated with a variety of medications. For the treatment
of spasticity, tizanidine, baclofen, and cannabinoids are used. For muscle cramps, magnesium supplements,
gabapentin, carbamazepine, and quinine sulfate are used. Sialorrhea is treated by injecting botulin toxin
into the salivary gland or anticholinergic medication [2].
PT
In ALS, PT has to be considered a palliative and supportive healthcare arbitration. Palliative, symptomatic,
and rehabilitative treatments are commonly delivered by an interdisciplinary team that consists of physical
therapists, neurologists, nurses, and home healthcare support and can help improve the quality of life and
change the end-of-life experience of patients and their families. There are three phases of disease
progression in PALS: early (initial), middle, and late (terminal) phases. In the early phase, individuals can
independently carry out their activities of daily living (ADLs). In the middle phase, mobility restriction is
severe due to ALS progression. In the late phase, patients become completely dependent on mobility,
respiratory issues, dysarthria, and dysphagia. It is important to note that exercise can significantly impact
the health and well-being of those with neurodegenerative diseases. After diagnosis, one of the first steps to
maximize the functionality of PALS is to prescribe such physical exercises. For PALS, physiotherapy can be
customized to their specific requirements and needs. It can help address symptoms and maximize the
functionality of PALS, allowing them to live life to the fullest. Commonly advised exercises for PALS include
ROM and exercises that mainly involve stretching. To achieve therapeutic goals, strength training for
muscles employing low-to-mild intensity and load, coupled with aerobic exercises, for example, stationary
cycling, swimming, and walking, are some of the exercises frequently used to treat PALS. In the early and
middle phases of ALS, strength training and aerobic exercises are considered more suitable for PALS.
Moreover, it is crucial for physiotherapists to strike an equilibrium between underworking and overworking
patients and to make accommodations according to their responses and other disease-related factors. PALS
should be careful not to push themselves too much and to track any signs of overuse or fatigue in an
exercise log that can be reviewed by their physical therapist. If any symptoms do occur, it is important to
cease the exercises and re-evaluate with the physiotherapist [6,18,24].
Therapy for Bulbar Symptoms
Management of dysphagia: Bulbar symptoms such as dysarthria and dysphagia are the most typical features
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
7 of 11

of ALS and can dramatically reduce the quality of life. Dysphagia is commonly associated with aspiration,
drooling, malnutrition (accompanied by weight loss), and dehydration. PALS patients who display bulbar
symptoms experience more severe swallowing complications, such as aspiration. Swallowing dysfunction
occurs because of the inefficacy of oral movements, laryngeal elevation, pharyngeal contraction, and
restriction of tongue base movements. Early and personalized nutritional care should be provided to PALS in
their initial phase of disease due to the weight loss associated with bulbar symptoms such as dysphagia. The
loss of body fat and lean mass relates to the decreased energy reserve in PALS. Jejunostomy, or gastrotomy,
is an alternative way of feeding PALS. The benefit of gastrotomy is enhanced nutrition, as nutrients come
directly to the stomach via this procedure. These disabilities are examined by the use of instrumented
methods, such as videofluoroscopy and fibroendoscopic evaluation of swallowing. Nutritional support is
indicated in PALS that demonstrate severe problems with swallowing. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrotomy
(PEG) tube placement is appropriate for PALS with dysphagia to administer proper medication and nutrition
[20,32].
Management of dysarthria: Speech loss is a significant challenge for PALS and their loved ones, with
dysarthria being the primary symptom in 25%-37% of cases and affecting over 80% of patients as the disease
progresses. Effective treatment of dysarthria is crucial for providing multidisciplinary care for ALS. The most
commonly used measures in the early stages include speech therapy, and in the advanced stages,
communication devices are added. Electronic machines coupled with voice output or head/eye tracking
systems can greatly improve communication speed and the character of life for PALS. Patients using
communication devices reported little-to-no struggle with handling and found the devices to have a
stronger impact on their character of life in comparison to speech therapy. Although speech therapy can be
helpful in the initial phase of the disease, it slightly retards the inevitable deterioration in speech, which
may explain why patients rate its impact lower. In contrast, communication devices can restore the
communicative ability of PALS with advanced dysarthria/anarthria. Communication systems enhance the
character of mood and life in individuals with ALS and should be given in the initial stage of the disease.
With the use of communication devices, PALS can also cope with their depression and psychological
distress. Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) can meet most of the objectives that are part
of the palliative care of PALS. Communication is fundamental for human beings, and using communication
devices to give some of these PALS the ability to express themselves again is monumental [21-23,33].
Management of respiratory problems: Chronic respiratory failure is one of the most common and
incapacitating features accompanying PALS. Due to weakness in the bulbar, expiratory, and inspiratory
muscles, PALS can take advantage of mechanical devices that cater to cough augmentation and ventilatory
support. Initial symptoms related to weakness of respiratory muscles greatly vary and mainly involve
shortness of breath, confusion, poor concentration, orthopnea, sleepiness in the daytime, fatigue, and
morning headaches. Moreover, weakness of the expiratory muscle leads to reduced cough and clear
secretion. As the disease advances, respiratory-related issues become more likely, and most PALS will
eventually need some form of treatment. Physical therapists must prioritize asking PALS about symptoms of
respiratory insufficiency during every clinical visit. Testing for maximum inspiratory pressure, sniff nasal
pressure, vital capacity, peak cough expiratory flow, and vital capacity should be conducted at least every
three months to ensure proper care. Noninvasive ventilation is the lifelong treatment for respiratory
insufficiency in PALS. The use of noninvasive ventilation through a mouthpiece interface or mask can
provide ventilatory support in PALS. Mechanically assisted cough can assist with secretion clearing and
provide lung volume recruitment. Airway clearance treatment and noninvasive therapies are regarded as
standard treatments for PALS with respiratory failure due to neuromuscular degeneration. Furthermore,
pharyngeal and laryngeal complications are treated with various measures, such as breathing and voice
exercises, compensatory techniques, body positioning, dietary modifications, and the close cooperation of a
multidisciplinary team. PT also works to restrengthen the muscles controlling swallowing and can be a
useful tool in avoiding pharyngeal complications [18,19,22,34].
Depression and distress management: There is considerable anxiety and depression felt among PALS and
their families, along with additional financial and social burdens. Recommended psychological treatment
consists of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) supplemented by various coping strategies and situational
reappraisal skills. Patients need to be engaged in several healthy and interactive activities to effectively
overcome their depression. The objective of CBT is to enhance cognitive and emotional processing in PALS.
The character of the life of PALS can be enhanced by improving behavioral patterns through behavioral
therapy. Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is predominantly focused on cognitive interventions.
The ACT approach includes multiple techniques, such as motivational, acceptance, mindfulness, and
behavior change approaches, to eliminate negative thoughts or emotions. These techniques help patients be
aware of their present moments and committed actions and improve their psychological flexibility. It is
fundamental to take into consideration the heavy care burden that patients' relatives are subjected to,
which, in the long term, may affect their health and quality of life. ALS patients with severe disease
progression may be offered and have access to palliative care, which can enhance not only patients' quality
of life but also family caregivers. Mental health of ALS patients and family caregivers may also be taken into
account, and psychotherapy strategies can diminish anxiety and depression and aid with the regrettable
outcome of the disease [35-37].
Strengths and limitations
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
8 of 11

Our narrative review utilized a comprehensive search strategy, including specific keywords and MeSH terms,
to gather relevant articles, which increased the likelihood of capturing a wide range of studies. To ensure
that the selected articles were aligned with the research topic, explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria were
established. The focus on the latest advancements in ALS treatment contributes to the relevance of the
review’s findings. However, our review also has some limitations. One potential limitation is excluding non-
English studies, which could introduce a language bias and omit valuable research conducted in other
languages. Despite involving multiple reviewers, the review is susceptible to reviewer subjectivity during the
article screening process. There is also the risk of publication bias, as the review might inadvertently include
predominantly positive or significant findings while excluding studies with null or nonsignificant results.
Finally, this research paper distinguishes itself through its pioneering approach as one of the few studies in
the field of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis treatment. In conclusion, this review not only expands the horizons
of research but also holds promise for positively impacting the lives of PALS and shaping the trajectory of
future scientific investigations.
Conclusions
ALS is a severe, debilitating, and ultimately fatal illness despite the tremendous multidisciplinary
commitment to seeking a cure and a plethora of treatment studies. The advantages of currently approved
therapies are modest. In this review, we looked at ALS and the current treatment modalities that are used in
a range of clinical settings. We have identified several plausible factors that may be contributing to the high
failure rates present in ALS clinical trials, including but not limited to the selection of the incorrect cellular
target, defective clinical trial design, patient selection bias, inadequate medication exposure, lack of
compliance, and how uncommon ALS is in the general population, further complicating participation in
trials. Although various medications have shown efficacy in animal models of ALS, none have significantly
increased longevity or improved the quality of life in PALS. One of the drugs used to treat ALS is riluzole, an
anti-glutamatergic substance. In recent advances, edaravone, an antioxidant and free radical scavenger, has
been shown to reduce oxidative stress and delay illness onset. Another licensed drug that improves overall
survival and day-to-day functioning is sodium phenylbutyrate/taurursodiol. Other therapeutic strategies,
such as posttranslational modification, are also being researched for their potential advantages in ALS
treatment. Nonpharmacological therapies, such as robotics, therapy for bulbar symptoms, communication
devices, rehabilitation, PT, and stem cell therapy, require increased attention. They are essential in
maximizing functional abilities and improving the overall well-being of PALS. One of the significant
challenges for PALS is the prevalence of mental burdens, such as fear, anxiety, and depression. Effective
psychological therapies included and integrated into palliative care principles can help patients overcome or
cope with fear, anxiety, and loneliness and contribute to an improved end-of-life experience for both
patients and their families. Researchers are conducting numerous trials to develop a cure for ALS. Further
research is urgently needed to identify new therapeutics that go beyond drug repurposing methods to
combat ALS effectively. Because ALS is caused by a variety of factors, different agents can be used to target
various factors, which could open new doors for treatment. In terms of emerging treatment modalities, gene
therapy and cellular therapy have been shown to target multiple pathogenic mechanisms and enhance
clinical function and muscle strength. There is a growing need for more clinical trials on different kinase
inhibitors that can suppress neuroinflammation and inhibit apoptosis.
Additional Information
Disclosures
Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the
following: Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was received from
any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: All authors have declared that they have
no financial relationships at present or within the previous three years with any organizations that might
have an interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared that there are no
other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
Acknowledgements
PH, NH, and APA conceptualized the review and drafted and edited the manuscript. PH and NH worked
equally on the manuscript and should be considered co-first authors. MPK and RG worked on the
methodology and drafted the manuscript. US and SD brought out the initial results and drafted the
manuscript. AA, MJ, BH, SH, and DC worked on the discussion and conclusion and drafted the manuscript.
APA supervised the project. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. All authors agree to be
accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any
part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.
References
1. 
Lin TJ, Cheng GC, Wu LY, Lai WY, Ling TY, Kuo YC, Huang YH: Potential of cellular therapy for ALS: current
strategies and future prospects. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022, 10:851613. 10.3389/fcell.2022.851613
2. 
Masrori P, Van Damme P: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a clinical review . Eur J Neurol. 2020, 27:1918-29.
10.1111/ene.14393
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
9 of 11

3. 
Tzeplaeff L, Wilfling S, Requardt MV, Herdick M: Current state and future directions in the therapy of ALS .
Cells. 2023, 12:1523. 10.3390/cells12111523
4. 
Marcu IR, Patru S, Bighea A: Diagnosis particularities of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in an elderly patient .
Curr Health Sci J. 2018, 44:92-6. 10.12865/CHSJ.44.01.16
5. 
Fumagalli E, Funicello M, Rauen T, Gobbi M, Mennini T: Riluzole enhances the activity of glutamate
transporters GLAST, GLT1 and EAAC1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008, 578:171-6. 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.10.023
6. 
Meyer R, Spittel S, Steinfurth L, et al.: Patient-reported outcome of physical therapy in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis: observational online study. JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol. 2018, 5:e10099. 10.2196/10099
7. 
Oberstadt MC, Esser P, Classen J, Mehnert A: Alleviation of psychological distress and the improvement of
quality of life in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: adaptation of a short-term psychotherapeutic
intervention. Front Neurol. 2018, 9:231. 10.3389/fneur.2018.00231
8. 
Bensimon G, Lacomblez L, Delumeau JC, Bejuit R, Truffinet P, Meininger V: A study of riluzole in the
treatment of advanced stage or elderly patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol. 2002, 249:609-
15. 10.1007/s004150200071
9. 
Doble A: The pharmacology and mechanism of action of riluzole . Neurology. 1996, 47:S233-41.
10.1212/wnl.47.6_suppl_4.233s
10. 
Cruz MP: Edaravone (Radicava): a novel neuroprotective agent for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. P T. 2018, 43:25-8.
11. 
Witzel S, Maier A, Steinbach R, et al.: Safety and effectiveness of long-term intravenous administration of
edaravone for treatment of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. JAMA Neurol. 2022, 79:121-30.
10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.4893
12. 
Paganoni S, Watkins C, Cawson M, et al.: Survival analyses from the CENTAUR trial in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis: evaluating the impact of treatment crossover on outcomes. Muscle Nerve. 2022, 66:136-41.
10.1002/mus.27569
13. 
Miller TM, Cudkowicz ME, Genge A, et al.: Trial of antisense oligonucleotide tofersen for SOD1 ALS . N Engl J
Med. 2022, 387:1099-110. 10.1056/NEJMoa2204705
14. 
Benatar M, Wuu J, Andersen PM, et al.: Design of a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial of tofersen
initiated in clinically presymptomatic SOD1 variant carriers: the ATLAS study. Neurotherapeutics. 2022,
19:1248-58. 10.1007/s13311-022-01237-4
15. 
Li Y, Guo Y, Wang X, et al.: Trehalose decreases mutant SOD1 expression and alleviates motor deficiency in
early but not end-stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a SOD1-G93A mouse model. Neuroscience. 2015,
298:12-25. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.03.061
16. 
Cruz MP: Nuedexta for the treatment of pseudobulbar affect: a condition of involuntary crying or laughing .
P T. 2013, 38:325-8.
17. 
Smith R, Pioro E, Myers K, et al.: Enhanced bulbar function in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: the Nuedexta
treatment trial. Neurotherapeutics. 2017, 14:762-72. 10.1007/s13311-016-0508-5
18. 
Bello-Haas VD: Physical therapy for individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: current insights .
Degener Neurol Neuromuscul Dis. 2018, 8:45-54. 10.2147/DNND.S146949
19. 
Plowman EK, Tabor-Gray L, Rosado KM, et al.: Impact of expiratory strength training in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis: results of a randomized, sham-controlled trial. Muscle Nerve. 2019, 59:40-6. 10.1002/mus.26292
20. 
Brent JR, Franz CK, Coleman JM 3rd, Ajroud-Driss S: ALS: management problems. Neurol Clin. 2020,
38:565-75. 10.1016/j.ncl.2020.03.013
21. 
Körner S, Sieniawski M, Kollewe K, et al.: Speech therapy and communication device: impact on quality of
life and mood in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal
Degener. 2013, 14:20-5. 10.3109/17482968.2012.692382
22. 
Kühnlein P, Gdynia HJ, Sperfeld AD, Lindner-Pfleghar B, Ludolph AC, Prosiegel M, Riecker A: Diagnosis and
treatment of bulbar symptoms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2008, 4:366-74.
10.1038/ncpneuro0853
23. 
Cohen SM, Elackattu A, Noordzij JP, Walsh MJ, Langmore SE: Palliative treatment of dysphonia and
dysarthria. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2009, 42:107-21. 10.1016/j.otc.2008.09.010
24. 
Paganoni S, Karam C, Joyce N, Bedlack R, Carter GT: Comprehensive rehabilitative care across the spectrum
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. NeuroRehabilitation. 2015, 37:53-68. 10.3233/NRE-151240
25. 
Bissaro M, Moro S: Rethinking to riluzole mechanism of action: the molecular link among protein kinase
CK1δ activity, TDP-43 phosphorylation, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pharmacological treatment.
Neural Regen Res. 2019, 14:2083-5. 10.4103/1673-5374.262578
26. 
Cho H, Shukla S: Role of edaravone as a treatment option for patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis .
Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2020, 14:29. 10.3390/ph14010029
27. 
Zoccolella S, Santamato A, Lamberti P: Current and emerging treatments for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis .
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2009, 5:577-95. 10.2147/ndt.s7788
28. 
Elia AE, Lalli S, Monsurrò MR, et al.: Tauroursodeoxycholic acid in the treatment of patients with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Eur J Neurol. 2016, 23:45-52. 10.1111/ene.12664
29. 
Kaspi H, Semo J, Abramov N, et al.: MSC-NTF (NurOwn®) exosomes: a novel therapeutic modality in the
mouse LPS-induced ARDS model. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2021, 12:72. 10.1186/s13287-021-02143-w
30. 
Nam JY, Lee TY, Kim K, et al.: Efficacy and safety of Lenzumestrocel (Neuronata-R® inj.) in patients with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALSUMMIT study): study protocol for a multicentre, randomized, double-
blind, parallel-group, sham procedure-controlled, phase III trial. Trials. 2022, 23:415. 10.1186/s13063-022-
06327-4
31. 
Gotkine M, Caraco Y, Lerner Y, et al.: Safety and efficacy of first-in-man intrathecal injection of human
astrocytes (AstroRx®) in ALS patients: phase I/IIa clinical trial results. J Transl Med. 2023, 21:122.
10.1186/s12967-023-03903-3
32. 
Russ KB, Phillips MC, Wilcox CM, Peter S: Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Am J Med Sci. 2015, 350:95-7. 10.1097/MAJ.0000000000000517
33. 
Brownlee A, Palovcak M: The role of augmentative communication devices in the medical management of
ALS. NeuroRehabilitation. 2007, 22:445-50. 10.3233/NRE-2007-22607
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
10 of 11

34. 
Graustein A, Carmona H, Benditt JO: Noninvasive respiratory assistance as aid for respiratory care in
neuromuscular disorders. Front Rehabil Sci. 2023, 4:1152043. 10.3389/fresc.2023.1152043
35. 
Kurt A, Nijboer F, Matuz T, Kübler A: Depression and anxiety in individuals with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis: epidemiology and management. CNS Drugs. 2007, 21:279-91. 10.2165/00023210-200721040-
00003
36. 
Gould RL, Rawlinson C, Thompson B, et al.: Acceptance and commitment therapy for people living with
motor neuron disease: an uncontrolled feasibility study. Pilot Feasibility Stud. 2023, 9:116. 10.1186/s40814-
023-01354-7
37. 
Caga J, Hsieh S, Lillo P, Dudley K, Mioshi E: The impact of cognitive and behavioral symptoms on ALS
patients and their caregivers. Front Neurol. 2019, 10:192. 10.3389/fneur.2019.00192
2023 Hoxhaj et al. Cureus 15(9): e45489. DOI 10.7759/cureus.45489
11 of 11
