SCIENCE OF MEDICINE
                                             Missouri Medicine | September/October 2013| 110:5 | 417  
Management of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
ďǇdĂŚĂĂůŝ͕DΘdŝŵŽƚŚǇD͘DŝůůĞƌ͕D͕WŚ
dĂŚĂĂůŝ͕D͕;ůĞŌͿ͕ŝƐĂ&ĞůůŽǁ͕
Neuromuscular Disease Division, and 
dŝŵŽƚŚǇD͘DŝůůĞƌ͕D͕WŚ͕
is an Assistant Professor of Neurology 
at the Washington University School of 
Medicine in St. Louis.
Contact: millert@neuro.wustl.edu
ŚƩƉ͗ͬͬŵŝůůĞƌůĂď͘ǁƵƐƚů͘ĞĚƵͬ
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
is a fatal neurodegeneraƟ ǀe 
disease that currently 
remains incurable, but can 
be managed symptomaƟ cally 
oǀer the disease duraƟ on to 
maintain the highest quality 
of life possible͘
Abstract
Motor Neuron Diseases 
(MNDs) are neurological 
disorders characterized by 
the selective and progressive 
degeneration of motor neurons.  
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
(ALS), commonly known as Lou 
Gehrig’s disease, is the most 
common.  ALS causes diffuse 
muscle weakness and death 
secondary to respiratory failure.  
The diagnosis is made clinically, 
supported by electrodiagnostic 
testing.  Although medications 
are limited, careful attention to 
breathing, nutrition, and patient 
mobility can have a major, 
positive impact on the course of 
the disease.   
IntroducƟ on
Motor Neuron Diseases (MNDs) 
are a group of progressive disorders 
that are invariably fatal and affect the 
motor system, involving the upper, 
lower motor neurons, or both.  The 
most common entity under the 
umbrella of MNDs is Amyotrophic 
Lateral Sclerosis (ALS).  ALS is a 
progressive neurodegenerative disease 
that affects both upper and lower 
motor neurons, with pathology 
spanning the primary motor cortex, 
corticospinal tracts, brainstem and 
spinal cord, and causing diffuse 
muscle weakness, atrophy, spasticity 
and eventually death, typically due 
to respiratory failure.  Other, less 
common subtypes of MND include 
Progressive Muscular Atrophy 
(PMA), which affects only the lower 
motor neurons; Primary Lateral 
Sclerosis (PLS), which affects only 
the upper motor neurons; and 
Progressive Bulbar Palsy (PBP), which 
involves both upper and lower motor 
neurons but remains conﬁ ned to 
bulbar muscles (i.e. brainstem centers 
responsible for facial movements, 
swallowing, speech, chewing and 
breathing).  MNDs also include 
hereditary diseases such as Spinal 
Muscular Atrophy (SMA) and Spinal-
Bulbar Muscular Atrophy (SBMA), etc. 
This review will focus mainly on ALS.1 
The incidence of ALS is estimated 
to be 1.7 cases per 100,000 per year,2 
with the cumulative lifetime risk of 
developing the disease by age 75 being 
approximately 1:1000.3  The median 
age of onset is approximately 64 years 
for men and 67 for women with the 
male to female ratio estimated to be 
1.8:1.4  ALS is associated with a family 
history in approximately 10-20% of 
cases.   Familial ALS (FALS) is deﬁ ned 
as the presence of a ﬁ rst degree 
relative also affected by the disease and 
most commonly follows an autosomal 
dominant inheritance pattern.  As 
many as one-third of familial ALS cases 
are caused by a recently discovered 
repeat expansion that is also linked 
to Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD), 
and hence, a careful family history 
exploring the presence of a dementia 

418 | 110:5 |September/October 2013 | Missouri Medicine
SCIENCE OF MEDICINE
syndrome and/or other neurodegenerative disorders in any 
family members should always be performed.5 
CůŝŶŝĐĂů WƌĞƐĞŶƚĂƟ ŽŶ 
The hallmark of ALS is progressive development of 
motor symptoms and signs, with no accompanying sensory 
involvement.
SǇŵƉƚŽŵƐ  
Onset typically is gradual, occurring over a period 
of months, and is characterized by speech, breathing, or 
swallowing difﬁ culty and weakness or loss of dexterity in 
one limb.   Symptoms inevitably progress to involve other 
regions.  Other features may include muscle wasting, 
muscle twitching (fasciculations), cramps, stiffness, and 
slowness.  Fasciculations that are unaccompanied by 
wasting or weakness generally are due to benign causes 
rather than ALS.   Bulbar onset with dysarthria and 
dysphagia occurs in one quarter to one third of cases.6,7  
Bulbar disease can also manifest with voice hoarseness, 
sialorrhea, or “pseudobulbar affect,” i.e. mood instability 
characterized by insuppressible crying or laughter in 
response to emotional stimuli.  Weight loss can occur with 
bulbar dysfunction or respiratory involvement.
Signs  
The neurological exam for the diagnosis of ALS should 
focus on testing for upper motor neuron signs (UMN) 
and lower motor neuron signs (LMN).  UMN signs are 
spasticity, hyperreﬂ exia, and slowed movements of arms 
or legs.  LMN signs include weakness, muscle atrophy (See 
Figure 1) and fasciculations. 
SǇŵƉƚŽŵsͬSigns ƚŚĂƚ dǇƉiĐĂůůǇ DŽ NŽƚ 
ƉƉĞĂƌ in >S ĂnĚ SƵggĞsƚ nŽƚŚĞƌ Žƌ 
ĚĚiƟ ŽnĂů DiĂgnŽsis
Although symptomatic stabilization in a certain affected 
body region is occasionally observed, remission of symptoms 
and signs is rare, and when present should cast doubt over 
the ALS diagnosis.  Similarly, bowel and bladder sphincter 
function, extraocular muscles and the sensory system are all 
typically spared, and when involved should trigger further 
investigation into other potential causes of the patient’s 
illness. 
DisĞĂsĞ CŽƵƌsĞ  
Typical survival time from diagnosis is three to ﬁ ve years, 
although there is wide variation with some patients surviving 
for as little as six months and others for up to 20 years.  For 
most patients, the pace of the disease remains relatively 
constant.  A rapid increase in the rate of disease progression 
should provoke examination of other possible causes of 
worsening (e.g. infection).  
Disease Variants
While ALS is typiﬁ ed by the combination of both 
upper and lower motor dysfunction without sensory or 
cognitive disturbances, there are distinct variants of ALS that 
do not follow this pattern.  Progressive muscular atrophy 
(PMA) is a lower motor neuron only variant of ALS.  These 
patients have progressive muscle atrophy and weakness, 
but not the hyperreﬂ exia, spasticity, and slowness typical of 
ALS.   Many, though not all, patients with PMA eventually 
develop the UMN signs and symptoms.  It is this variant that 
symptomatically overlaps most closely with multifocal motor 
neuropathy, a treatable ALS mimic. 
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is an upper motor neuron 
variant.  These patients have severe spasticity, hyperreﬂ exia, 
slowness, but do not have the muscle atrophy and weakness.  
Central nervous system disorders such as multiple sclerosis, 
strokes, and other structural lesions can give a similar 
presentation and are typically excluded by MRI imaging.  
Some of these patients do develop LMN signs and symptoms 
and more typical ALS.    
Frontotemporal Dementia with ALS (FTD/ALS):  
A variant of ALS that suggests a hereditary disease is 
Frontotemporal Dementia with ALS (FTD/ALS).  Patients 
develop a dementia syndrome distinguished by prominent 
deterioration in language and behavior, concomitant with, 
and occasionally years preceding the typical ALS motor 
symptoms (see “Unravelling the Mysteries of Frontotemporal 
Dementia” by Ghoshal and Cairns).7  Unlike Alzheimer’s 
disease, memory is typically preserved early in the course 
Figure 1
/ntrinsic ŚĂnd muscůe ĂtropŚǇ commonůǇ seen in >S pĂƟ ents͘

SCIENCE OF MEDICINE
                                             Missouri Medicine | September/October 2013| 110:5 | 419  
of dementia.  While up to 40% of individuals with ALS may 
have some evidence of FTD on careful neuropsychiatric 
testing, only about 5-10% have fully developed FTD that 
manifests with behavioral changes noticed by the physician or 
caregivers.  As noted previously, a recently reported autosomal 
dominant inherited expansion of a region of chromosome 9 
underlies most of recognized FTD/ALS cases.5
tŚen dŽ ZeĨer
 Since ALS is rare and many physicians are unfamiliar 
with its presentation, the diagnosis is often delayed.  
Common clinical features that should prompt early referral 
to a neuromuscular specialist include:   atrophy/weakness of 
muscles in a limb with increased deep tendon reﬂ exes in that 
same limb, atrophy/weakness of muscles in one area with 
complaint of more widespread fasciculations and cramps, and 
progressively slurred speech with an unremarkable MRI of 
the brain.     
DiagnŽsƟ Đ desƟ ng
The disease ALS is diagnosed clinically based on the 
presence of UMN signs and LMN signs while excluding 
other possible causes.  Formal criteria for ALS have 
been established (the El Escorial Criteria).8  Laboratory 
investigation is focused on deﬁ ning other causes (possible 
ALS mimic syndromes) which may be amenable to therapy.  
Testing for patients with suspected ALS typically consists 
of electrodiagnostic tests (electromyography [EMG] and 
nerve conduction studies [NCS]), MRI brain imaging, and 
laboratory testing (See Table 1).
Imaging 
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is used to exclude 
any structural lesions that could potentially account for the 
patient’s presentation.  Cervical spine disease with wasting 
and weakness in the arms or hands at the level of the lesion 
and spasticity in the legs typically is the most important 
condition to exclude.  For presentations with speech 
abnormalities, excluding structural lesions (e.g., stroke) with 
brain MRI is important.   
EůeĐtrŽĚiagnŽsƟ Đ desƟ ng anĚ >aď tŽrŬ
EMG and NCS evidence of denervation in three body 
regions with normal sensory responses is the hallmark of ALS.  
Treatable motor neuropathies that mimic ALS such as multifocal 
motor neuropathy (MMN) are the most important diagnoses to 
exclude and can often be recognized on these tests. 
Table 1
dests indicĂted in tŚe eǀĂůuĂƟ on oĨ pĂƟ ents suspected to ŚĂǀe >S
ŚZ ĂcetǇůcŚoůine receptor͖ M'/ES: ůectromǇoŐrĂm Ănd nerǀe conducƟ on studies͖ ,SW: ,ereditĂrǇ SpĂsƟ c WĂrĂpůeŐiĂ͖ MuS<: muscůe speciĮ c ŬinĂse͖ 
OWM: ocuůopŚĂrǇnŐeĂů muscuůĂr dǇstropŚǇ͖ SM: SpinĂůͲuůbĂr MuscuůĂr tropŚǇ͖ SM: SpinĂů MuscuůĂr tropŚǇ͖ SO1: Superoǆide dismutĂse 1͖ ZES: 
ZepeƟ Ɵ ǀe nerǀe sƟ muůĂƟ on͖ s': ǀoůtĂŐeͲŐĂted cĂůcium cŚĂnneů͘

420 | 110:5 |September/October 2013 | Missouri Medicine
SCIENCE OF MEDICINE
Laboratory tests are focused on excluding 
autoimmune-mediated neuropathy, such as Multifocal 
Motor Neuropathy (MMN).  Anti-GM1 or NS6S 
antibodies are present in up to 64% of MMN patients9  
and combined with characteristic changes on EMG/NCS 
strongly suggest MMN, a disorder that often is responsive 
to immunomodulatory therapy.  A low vitamin B12 level 
or thyroid disorders may complicate management and thus 
should be identiﬁ ed and corrected.  Low copper can present 
with motor greater than sensory disturbances, although the 
sensory complaints provide a clue that ALS is unlikely.  
'eneƟ Đ desƟ ng
Genetic testing is recommended for patients with a 
family history of ALS.  The most common genetic cause 
for familial ALS known to date is the hexanucleotide repeat 
expansion in the C9ORF72 gene, which is also known 
to be associated with FTD.  A family history of FTD, 
even without an associated motor syndrome might spark 
testing for a C9ORF72 mutation.5  Genetic counseling 
before testing is appropriate for patients and is strongly 
recommended before asymptomatic family members are 
tested.  
Management
Following a diagnosis of ALS, the patient and 
care providers should receive regular support from a 
multidisciplinary care team.  While the medications 
available to slow the progression of ALS are limited, careful 
attention to breathing, nutrition, and patient mobility can 
have a positive impact on the course of the disease.   
ZiůƵǌŽůe 
Riluzole (Rilutek®) is the only FDA approved drug for 
ALS, and has been shown to prolong survival in ALS patients 
by three to six months.  The modest beneﬁ t and high cost 
of the medication has limited enthusiasm for this treatment 
among some neurologists and patients, but the medication 
should be discussed with each patient.  Riluzole is well 
tolerated overall, but patients should be monitored for 
liver toxicity.  Elevation of hepatic enzymes to three to ﬁ ve 
times the upper limit of normal can occur but is typically 
self-limited and transient.10  It is generally recommended to 
monitor liver enzymes at one week, one month and every 
six months after the initiation of riluzole, and to stop the 
drug if liver enzymes are elevated to more than ﬁ ve times 
the upper limit of normal.  Riluzole typically is given at 50 
mg twice per day. 
ZesƉiraƟ Žn 
Respiratory function should be assessed by measuring 
forced vital capacity (FVC)11 and maximal inspiratory 
pressure (MIP; a.k.a. negative inspiratory force (NIF)), and 
nocturnal oximetry12.  The potential need for non-invasive 
ventilation (NIV) should be discussed with patients early in 
disease, and offered when FVC is less than 50%.13  Patients 
using NIV have been shown in a randomized controlled study 
to have a median survival beneﬁ t of 205 days.14    
NƵtriƟ Žn 
Dysphagia is a common problem for ALS patients, leading 
to choking, aspiration, poor nutrition, and weight loss.  At the 
ﬁ rst signs of dysphagia, a swallowing study should be obtained 
by a speech pathologist.  A change in diet to soft consistency, 
high caloric foods may initially ameliorate the problem, 
but in many ALS cases, oral intake becomes insufﬁ cient. 
Supplementation, via percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy 
(PEG), is often required.  PEG placement in ALS patients 
results in the stabilization, and occasionally partial regain, 
of weight15 and may  prolong survival 16.  In discussing PEG 
tube it is important to emphasize that that oral feeding 
does not have to completely stop.  The decision for a PEG 
placement should be made early in the course of the disease 
as restricted pulmonary function (FVC<50%) increases the 
chances of procedure-related complications.17
SiaůŽrrŚea
Sialorrhea and drooling in ALS is not related to saliva 
overproduction, but results from an inability to adequately 
handle and swallow saliva.  In some cases, a suction 
machine is sufﬁ cient to alleviate the problem.  Traditional 
pharmacologic treatment of sialorrhea involves the use of 
anticholinergic agents, including glycopyrrolate (Robinul®), 
amitriptyline (Elavil®), benztropinemesylate (Cogentin®), 
trihexyphenidyl (Artane®), transdermal hyoscine 
(Scopolamine®), and atropine drops in mouth13.  Common 
side effects include excessive drying of the nasopharynx, 
constipation, urinary retention, confusion, and sedation, 
particularly in the elderly.  Other treatments include Botox 
injections and low dose radiation therapy to the salivary 
glands.
WseƵĚŽďƵůďar ī aĐt
Antidepressants have been historically the mainstay of 
treatment for management of pseudobulbar affect.  Both 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and tricylic 
antidepressants (TCAs) may be helpful, with TCAs superior 
in treating concomitant sialorrhea when present18.  More 
recently, a ﬁ xed-dose combination of dextromethorphan 
(DM)/quinidine (Q) (30 mg DM/30 mg Q BID) has been 
shown to be effective in a randomized trial.19  Possible side 
effects include dizziness, nausea, and somnolence.  
EmŽƟ Žnaů SƵƉƉŽrt
The diagnosis of ALS can be emotionally difﬁ cult 
for patients and their caregivers.   Many patients ﬁ nd 
antidepressants (SSRI) medications helpful for mood even 

SCIENCE OF MEDICINE
                                             Missouri Medicine | September/October 2013| 110:5 | 421  
MM
when not meeting the full deﬁ nition of depression.  Support 
groups, available in most areas, can be very important for 
families and caregivers (see web resources at end of article).
EnĚ ŽĨ >iĨe IssƵes
A discussion regarding end of life planning should be 
initiated relatively early in disease.  For example, code status 
should be clariﬁ ed.  Most patients do not inquire about 
assisted suicide, though physicians should be prepared to 
discuss this issue.  
OtŚer WrŽďůems
Patients with ALS may develop other complaints 
related to the disease pathology, directly or indirectly, such 
as pain, spasticity, cramps, fatigue, depression and sleep 
difﬁ culty.  There are limited data focused on treatment 
of these problems in ALS patients, therefore standard 
management as with other conditions is recommended.  
Spasticity is generally treated with baclofen or tizanidine as 
ﬁ rst line agents.  Agents of choice for treatment of cramps 
are gabapentin and phenytoin,20 while quinine has been 
recently restricted to treatment of malaria by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) given its serious cardiac side 
effects proﬁ le.
Summary
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis is a fatal 
neurodegenerative disease that currently remains incurable, 
but can be managed symptomatically over the disease 
duration to maintain the highest quality of life possible.  
Management is focused on controlling the symptoms, 
improving patient safety and maintaining autonomy to the 
extent possible.  Multidisciplinary care in a coordinated 
ALS clinic setting is recommended.  A careful family history 
is important to determine the presence of disease in other 
family members, and increase the likelihood of ﬁ nding a 
genetic cause of the patient’s ALS syndrome.  Vigorous 
clinical and basic research in ALS may ultimately bring 
about treatments to successfully alter the disease course.1 
ZeĨerenĐes 
 1. Bedlack RS, Mitsumoto H. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis : a patient care guide for 
clinicians.
 2. Sorenson EJ, Stalker AP, Kurland LT, Windebank AJ. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1925 to 1998. Neurology. Jul 23 2002;59(2):280-282.
 3. Johnston CA, Stanton BR, Turner MR, et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in 
an urban setting: a population based study of inner city London. J Neurol. Dec 
2006;253(12):1642-1643.
 4. Traynor BJ, Codd MB, Corr B, Forde C, Frost E, Hardiman O. Incidence 
and prevalence of ALS in Ireland, 1995-
1997: a population-based study. Neurology. Feb 
1999;52(3):504-509.
 5. Renton AE, Majounie E, Waite A, et al. A 
hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the 
cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron. 
Oct 20 2011;72(2):257-268.
 6. Chio A, Calvo A, Moglia C, Mazzini L, Mora G. 
Phenotypic heterogeneity of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis: a population based study. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. Jul 2011;82(7):740-746.
 7. Lomen-Hoerth C, Anderson T, Miller B. The 
overlap of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. Oct 
8 2002;59(7):1077-1079.
 8. Brooks BR. El Escorial World Federation of Neurology criteria for the diagnosis 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Subcommittee on Motor Neuron Diseases/
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis of the World Federation of Neurology Research Group 
on Neuromuscular Diseases and the El Escorial “Clinical limits of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis” workshop contributors. J Neurol Sci. Jul 1994;124 Suppl:96-107.
 9. Pestronk A, Chuquilin M, Choksi R. Motor neuropathies and serum IgM binding 
to NS6S heparin disaccharide or GM1 ganglioside. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. Jul 
2010;81(7):726-730.
 10. Lacomblez L, Bensimon G, Leigh PN, Guillet P, Meininger V. Dose-ranging study 
of riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/Riluzole 
Study Group II. Lancet. May 25 1996;347(9013):1425-1431.
 11. Czaplinski A, Yen AA, Appel SH. Forced vital capacity (FVC) as an indicator 
of survival and disease progression in an ALS clinic population. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. Mar 2006;77(3):390-392.
 12. Jackson CE, Rosenfeld J, Moore DH, et al. A preliminary evaluation of a 
prospective study of pulmonary function studies and symptoms of hypoventilation in 
ALS/MND patients. J Neurol Sci. Oct 15 2001;191(1-2):75-78.
 13. Miller RG, Rosenberg JA, Gelinas DF, et al. Practice parameter: The care of the 
patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (An evidence-based review). Muscle Nerve. 
Aug 1999;22(8):1104-1118.
 14. Bourke SC, Tomlinson M, Williams TL, Bullock RE, Shaw PJ, Gibson GJ. Effects 
of non-invasive ventilation on survival and quality of life in patients with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. Feb 2006;5(2):140-147.
 15. Kasarskis EJ, Scarlata D, Hill R, Fuller C, Stambler N, Cedarbaum JM. A 
retrospective study of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in ALS patients during 
the BDNF and CNTF trials. J Neurol Sci. Oct 31 1999;169(1-2):118-125.
 16. Mazzini L, Corra T, Zaccala M, Mora G, Del Piano M, Galante M. Percutaneous 
endoscopic gastrostomy and enteral nutrition in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J 
Neurol. Oct 1995;242(10):695-698.
 17. Mathus-Vliegen LM, Louwerse LS, Merkus MP, Tytgat GN, Vianney de Jong JM. 
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
and impaired pulmonary function. Gastrointest Endosc. Jul-Aug 1994;40(4):463-469.
 18. Miller RG, Rosenberg JA, Gelinas DF, et al. Practice parameter: the care of the 
patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (an evidence-based review): report of 
the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology: ALS 
Practice Parameters Task Force. Neurology. Apr 22 1999;52(7):1311-1323.
 19. Brooks BR, Thisted RA, Appel SH, et al. Treatment of pseudobulbar affect 
in ALS with dextromethorphan/quinidine: a randomized trial. Neurology. Oct 26 
2004;63(8):1364-1370.
 20. 
Miller TM, Layzer RB. Muscle cramps. Muscle Nerve. Oct 2005;32(4):431-442.
DisĐůŽsures
T Bali has no disclosures. T Miller receives research 
support from the following:  NIH/NIA, NIH/NINDS, Project 
5 for ALS, Tau Consortium, ALS Association, Muscular 
Dystrophy Association, , Mallinckrodt Foundation, Hope 
Center for Neurological Disorders at Washington University, 
Washington University ICTS, Cure PSP, Isis Pharmaceuticals, 
Regulus Therapeutics and has ﬁ led patents in conjunction with 
Washington University regarding use of antisense oligonucleotides 
based therapeutic strategies for neurodegenerative diseases.
teď ZesŽurĐes ĨŽr >S
ͻ ŚƩ p://neuromuscuůĂr͘ǁustů͘edu/motor͘Śtmů
ͻ ŚƩ p://mdĂ͘orŐ/diseĂse/ĂmǇotropŚicͲůĂterĂůͲscůerosis
ͻ ŚƩ p://ǁǁǁ͘ĂůsĂ͘orŐ/
ͻ ŚƩ p://miůůerůĂb͘ǁustů͘edu/
